[Amit Varma]: How should we think of medicine as a profession?
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand, it's a career path like any other.
[Amit Varma]: You learn a skill, and people pay you for your expertise.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, it's also thought of as a noble calling.
[Amit Varma]: You help other people.
[Amit Varma]: You sometimes give them the gift of life, and sometimes you give them a better life.
[Amit Varma]: In India, doctors are mostly invisible to us, except when we have no option but to notice
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: Doctors can be both villains and heroes to us.
[Amit Varma]: On one hand, we rail against doctors who over-prescribe tests and medicine because that's the way
[Amit Varma]: their incentives go and patients be damned.
[Amit Varma]: We are objects to them.
[Amit Varma]: On the other hand, we go to them with our deepest problems, including our greatest anxiety,
[Amit Varma]: the fear of death.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not being hyperbolic when I say that over the last year, doctors and nurses
[Amit Varma]: and other medical personnel have been our greatest heroes.
[Amit Varma]: Lakhs of these frontline workers in India have gone beyond their call of duty, functioning
[Amit Varma]: in a battleground with limited information, driven not just by money, but by empathy and
[Amit Varma]: the desperate desire to help.
[Amit Varma]: They have risked their lives to save the lives of others.
[Amit Varma]: When I think of those who let us down in this crisis, and the politicians are on top of
[Amit Varma]: that list, I begin to lose faith in humanity.
[Amit Varma]: But then I look at the medical profession and I regain that faith.
[Amit Varma]: You see, we will beat this pandemic.
[Amit Varma]: And it won't just be a triumph of science and medicine when we do.
[Unknown]: It will also be a triumph of human beings expressing their humanity.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Lancelot Pinto, a doctor and a scholar who has come to public attention
[Amit Varma]: in the last few months for being a voice of reason in this fog of confusion.
[Amit Varma]: Lance has been clearing doubts and misconceptions since this pandemic began and has been especially
[Amit Varma]: eloquent in recent weeks on the dangers of over-prescribing drugs to COVID patients.
[Amit Varma]: Many of the deaths in recent weeks have come because of a dysfunctional state and were
[Amit Varma]: otherwise avoidable.
[Amit Varma]: But some have happened because of over-medication of doctors going overboard with medicine that
[Amit Varma]: has adverse side effects.
[Amit Varma]: Lance called this out early and I wouldn't be surprised if he saved lives not just in
[Amit Varma]: his work as a doctor, but also in his interventions as a public intellectual.
[Amit Varma]: Friends of mine have actually been patients of his in this time and praise him highly.
[Amit Varma]: I was delighted when he agreed to be a guest on the show.
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to explore a much wider canvas than just COVID though.
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to explore the practice of medicine.
[Amit Varma]: Why do doctors opt for this profession?
[Amit Varma]: What is a doctor's life really like away from the glamour of Robin Cook novels and
[Amit Varma]: ER and scrubs?
[Amit Varma]: What are the incentives that drive doctors, both as doctors and as human beings?
[Amit Varma]: How do they stay in touch with the cutting edge of medicine, which may be so different
[Amit Varma]: from what they learnt in their college textbooks?
[Amit Varma]: Beyond these general questions, I also wanted to talk about some of Lance's areas of specialisation.
[Amit Varma]: He runs smoking cessation clinics and talks about how medicine has now made it easy to
[Amit Varma]: quit smoking.
[Amit Varma]: He talks about the importance of sleep and the unintuitive ways in which our body functions.
[Amit Varma]: Did you know that a throat muscle can cause erectile dysfunction?
[Amit Varma]: This is the scene and the unseen right there.
[Amit Varma]: So we cover a lot of ground in this episode, and only the last half an hour or so is actually
[Amit Varma]: about COVID-19.
[Amit Varma]: I love this conversation, I learnt a lot from it, but before we get to it, let's take a
[Amit Varma]: quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more?
[Amit Varma]: I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading habit.
[Amit Varma]: This means that I read more books, but I also read more long-form articles and essays.
[Amit Varma]: There's a world of knowledge available through the internet.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem we all face is, how do we navigate this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: How do we know what to read?
[Amit Varma]: How do we put the right incentives in place?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I discovered one way.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com,
[Amit Varma]: which aims to help people up-level themselves by reading more.
[Amit Varma]: A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called The Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: Every day for six months, they sent me a long-form article to read.
[Amit Varma]: The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of every day, I understood the world a little better than I did before.
[Amit Varma]: So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to CTQ Compounds and check out
[Amit Varma]: their Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: New batches start every month.
[Amit Varma]: They also have a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up-to-date with
[Amit Varma]: ideas, skills, and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future.
[Amit Varma]: Future Stack batches start every Saturday.
[Amit Varma]: Also, check out their Social Capital Compound, which helps you master social media.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees, 2,500 if you use the discount
[Amit Varma]: code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to ctqcompounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: Unlevel yourself.
[Amit Varma]: So Amit, tell me about your childhood.
[Amit Varma]: Where did you grow up?
[Amit Varma]: What was it like before your journey in medicine began?
[Guest]: To begin with, Amit I don't think you've missed anything much in terms of my journey.
[Guest]: But I grew up in Mumbai.
[Guest]: I was born in Mumbai, grew up here, born in Bombay, grew up in Mumbai.
[Guest]: That's how I like to say it.
[Guest]: I was born in the suburbs of Mumbai called Bhandup.
[Guest]: It's a small little suburb on the central line.
[Guest]: So if you're familiar with Bombay, the suburbs are looked down upon very often but that's
[Guest]: where I began.
[Guest]: I went to a school called St. Xavier's School and my dad worked in administration at Crompton
[Guest]: Greaves and pretty much held one job all his life, you know, so that was who he was.
[Guest]: My mother was a school teacher at the school that I studied in.
[Guest]: She was a primary school teacher.
[Guest]: And both of them were migrants from Mangalore, so they moved after they got married.
[Guest]: My dad was here for a couple of years before that.
[Guest]: And you know, I remember my dad telling me stories about how he came to the city with
[Guest]: nothing, which is so true for a lot of migrants to Mumbai.
[Guest]: He stayed with his brother, who was already here for some time.
[Guest]: And that was my childhood.
[Guest]: So I grew up in a family where both my parents worked.
[Guest]: I think there was a strong ethos on working hard.
[Guest]: You know, I remember my dad leaving home at seven in the morning because he worked in
[Guest]: South Bombay, which is the other end of town, and would return by 7.30 or so in the evening.
[Guest]: I think education was always very important.
[Guest]: There was a stress on education.
[Guest]: However, I never felt pressured.
[Guest]: There was never any pressure to perform or, you know, there was never any, you will grow
[Guest]: up and become a doctor or engineer or anything of that sort.
[Guest]: Fortunately for me, and I really don't know, I mean, there may be a lot of subtle things
[Guest]: that help in life, which you don't realize.
[Guest]: Fortunately for me, I think I liked studying.
[Guest]: I was happy going to school.
[Guest]: I, in fact, you know, at the end of vacations, I was looking forward to school beginning
[Guest]: again.
[Guest]: And I was naturally drawn towards reading and studying and fortunately did well.
[Guest]: Somewhere along, you know, when you reach middle school to high school is when you start
[Guest]: thinking about what you want to become.
[Guest]: And I think I always wanted to become a pilot for some time.
[Guest]: Again, I guess it's a common thing for a lot of people to want to do adventurous things
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: But I think at some point of time, somewhere close to maybe my seventh grade or so, this
[Guest]: whole thing about taking up medicine became real.
[Guest]: Maybe it was influenced by the fact that my dad had a bypass when I was in the sixth standard.
[Guest]: There was some interaction with the healthcare system.
[Guest]: Maybe I looked up to some of those doctors in awe and there was a lot of reading of Robin
[Guest]: Cook as well, which I don't know whether that's a good thing or a bad thing, because that's
[Guest]: a very skewed presentation of medicine, but it still looks glamorous.
[Guest]: It looks interesting.
[Guest]: And I think I was naturally drawn towards medicine at that point of time.
[Guest]: So somewhere around the seventh or eighth standard, it was medicine and nothing else
[Guest]: for me.
[Guest]: Of course, growing up in a middle-class household in Mumbai, you do not think of too many different
[Guest]: options as a career.
[Guest]: You think of medicine, you think of engineering, you think of a few other things.
[Guest]: And in hindsight, maybe my alternative life would also include the possibility of journalism,
[Guest]: the possibility of being an author, the possibility of exploring the humanities in some way, because
[Guest]: I think that's a big lacuna in medical education that we aren't exposed to humanities.
[Guest]: So 10th standard, you know, big year, important year, you have to do well, I did reasonably
[Guest]: okay.
[Guest]: I went to a college called RUIA, which was, so that's another recurring theme in my life.
[Guest]: I always got into the second best college, I think, or second best of mostly everything.
[Guest]: And we talk about that.
[Guest]: So, you know, the number one college in Mumbai was considered Rupert L for the sciences.
[Guest]: I didn't make the cut.
[Guest]: So I went to RUIA.
[Guest]: Then 12th standard is another, you know, you realize that it's from a pool of 10,000 odd
[Guest]: people, about 100 seats are what's available in the public institutions where you want
[Guest]: to be in terms of an MBBS education.
[Guest]: And again, you know, the King Edward Memorial Hospital, or KEM is considered number one
[Guest]: in Mumbai.
[Guest]: I didn't.
[Guest]: So my percentage was 95.
[Guest]: And I think KEM stopped at 95 point something.
[Guest]: So I got into Sion Hospital.
[Guest]: And Sion Hospital was a very interesting experience in terms of, you know, there was a decent
[Guest]: balance of extracurricular activities as well as studies where, you know, it wasn't the
[Guest]: typical nerds where everybody constantly had their heads buried in books.
[Guest]: We had this festival called Ashwamedh, which was quite important every year.
[Guest]: So we got some exposure to, you know, debating, to doing a lot of public speaking, etc.
[Guest]: And those were good years.
[Guest]: That's pretty much the early years, if you ask me.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what kind of strikes me was that growing up as an 80s kid, I remember back
[Amit Varma]: in the day, the traditional occupations that good middle class kids were supposed to go
[Amit Varma]: as you said, was you do doctor and engineering, and a little later on MBA also became kind
[Amit Varma]: of fashionable.
[Amit Varma]: And this, of course, is if you didn't sit for the civil services.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I would imagine that by the 90s, post liberalization, all of this is kind of changing.
[Amit Varma]: But nevertheless, I think in the second half of the 90s, you decide to go in for an MBBS
[Amit Varma]: anyway, and you pointed out that you had a natural interest in this.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of things strike me.
[Amit Varma]: One is that it takes an awfully long time to become a doctor, you do your engineering
[Amit Varma]: course and you're an engineer.
[Amit Varma]: But with a doctor, it's just a years keep stretching on, it almost seems like you know,
[Amit Varma]: you're in your 30s before you can actually do anything.
[Amit Varma]: And even then, there is a survivorship bias where you hear of good doctors making a lot
[Amit Varma]: of money.
[Amit Varma]: But it's not necessary that at the end of that journey, you will be successful.
[Amit Varma]: So when you made that final call, I mean, obviously, you must have taken this into account.
[Amit Varma]: So what was the thinking that went behind it?
[Amit Varma]: And when you started, did you find that the study of medicine was turning out to be different
[Amit Varma]: from what you expected?
[Amit Varma]: Or you knew going in what it was going to be?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, as you pointed out, there's a Robin Cook influence and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about your decision making during this time, what you expected?
[Amit Varma]: What did you enjoy about it?
[Guest]: So it's a very interesting question you asked there, because so one of my closest friends
[Guest]: in school was a guy who went on to do engineering.
[Guest]: And I would spend a lot of time at his house, and it was a joint family, they had doctors
[Guest]: in their house as well.
[Guest]: And this constant theme that I was reminded of was, you know, you choose medicine, you're
[Guest]: just going to be studying, you will never make money, you will be studying till you're
[Guest]: 30-35.
[Guest]: You know, baal jhar jayenge, which, you know, unfortunately, is true right now.
[Guest]: But you know, baal jhar jayenge, lekin tumhara, you know, you'll still be studying and, you
[Guest]: know, obviously, anecdotes of doctors and their kids giving exams together, you know,
[Guest]: come to the fore, you know, look at him, his second standard son, and he had both giving
[Guest]: exams at the same time.
[Guest]: So those kinds of stories were constantly, you were constantly reminded that, you know,
[Guest]: you may not be making such a good choice.
[Guest]: You know, one of the things that really is very crystal clear in my head was this conversation
[Guest]: I had with this guy, whose wife worked for one of the hospitals in Mumbai.
[Guest]: And I don't remember whether she was a doctor or what was the context.
[Guest]: But he said something like, listen, you know, you will become a doctor, maybe, you know,
[Guest]: maybe you'll get into medicine.
[Guest]: But at the end of medicine, do you know how difficult it is to get a postgraduate seat,
[Guest]: you know, you will struggle with the postgraduate seat.
[Guest]: And everybody who doesn't get a postgraduate seat of their choice ends up doing PSM.
[Guest]: So PSM is preventive and social medicine.
[Guest]: And this is when I'm in like 10th standard, I don't even know what he's talking about,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So he says, you will do PSM, and all you will be telling people to do is wash their hands.
[Guest]: And the irony is that for the past year, all I've been telling people to do is wash their
[Guest]: hands, right?
[Guest]: It's somehow come back a full circle.
[Guest]: But to answer your question, I guess there is a lot of naivety when you make a choice
[Guest]: when you're exactly from the background that I am, you know, you are middle class.
[Guest]: So you don't have a strong safety net in that sense, where you can assume that you will
[Guest]: study indefinitely, and you know, you will somehow be supported.
[Guest]: And yet you make this leap of faith.
[Guest]: And I think that that decision is a difficult decision.
[Guest]: And I think some of that is is totally naivety, you know, because you don't know, really,
[Guest]: you've seen only the glamorous part of things, you don't realize that for every doctor who's
[Guest]: probably you know, in your face looking glamorous looking good, there are probably 10 doctors
[Guest]: who are really struggling, who are finding it difficult, because it's such a competitive
[Guest]: field because you know, everyone is pretty intelligent.
[Guest]: So I think that final leap of faith is very often made against all advice.
[Guest]: And it's made at a time when you really don't know what's on the other side.
[Guest]: So it's truly a leap of faith in that sense, you know, so to answer your question, I think,
[Guest]: you know, as fatalistic as it may sound, I've also believed that things which don't work
[Guest]: out sometimes just don't work out for a reason.
[Guest]: So had I not got the requisite marks to make it into medicine, maybe I would have just
[Guest]: like taken it in my stride and done something else at that point of time.
[Guest]: But even today, you know, so somebody going through the system, even today, where the
[Guest]: applicant pool is so high, you have to compete so hard to get into the right kind of colleges
[Guest]: to get a good education.
[Guest]: I think there's no simple answer, you know.
[Guest]: So if somebody asks me today, if somebody in my similar situation, who's in 10th or
[Guest]: 11th asks me today, whether this is the right choice for me, I will place the facts in front
[Guest]: of the person, but I will not tell them that it's a no brainer that you know, this is this
[Guest]: is the best life that you'll ever have, because it is a tough life.
[Guest]: And you know, I think that that's kind of my answer to your question.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, that's very illuminating, because just thinking aloud, you know, I had
[Amit Varma]: a young person come to me for advice a few months ago, where his mother wanted him to
[Amit Varma]: do medicine.
[Amit Varma]: And he was like, what's the scene?
[Amit Varma]: And I said, Listen, in the end, of course, it is a personal decision, it's up to you.
[Amit Varma]: But just putting my economics hat on, I would say that the opportunity cost of medicine
[Amit Varma]: is far higher.
[Amit Varma]: Because if you decide engineering is not for you, you can do an MBA, you can go to a scroll
[Amit Varma]: or a wire or the Times of India and say, make me a trainee reporter, or whatever there are
[Amit Varma]: all those options are kind of there.
[Amit Varma]: But medicine, you could be 30 by the time you realize you're not going to make it.
[Amit Varma]: And it could be too late.
[Amit Varma]: So if all things were equal, satirist parables, it would almost be a no brainer not to do
[Amit Varma]: medicine.
[Amit Varma]: But if that's where your heart lies, that's where your heart lies.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my other question here is that I've spoken to people who say that we got into medicine
[Amit Varma]: because of a passion for biology, because of the wonder of medicine, like one of my
[Amit Varma]: friends told me that, you know, one of his parents died of cancer when he was young.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, I want to find a cure for cancer, right.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore he gets into medicine.
[Amit Varma]: But having gotten a certain way along the academic path, he realized that wait a minute,
[Amit Varma]: doctors don't find a cure for anything, I need to be a scientist.
[Amit Varma]: And then he goes and he becomes a scientist.
[Amit Varma]: And now he's a successful academic somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, did you go through that kind of process?
[Amit Varma]: Because a lot of the things that I guess would attract you, which would be intellectually
[Amit Varma]: attractive or stimulating about the study of medicine would actually be related to science
[Amit Varma]: and higher research, rather than becoming a practicing doctor to begin with.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm aware that you have an MSc in epidemiology and all of that, which you went on to do,
[Amit Varma]: but you are a practicing doctor.
[Amit Varma]: So obviously, this has to be something that you then thought about.
[Amit Varma]: And what then made you decide that no, I will practice, I will be a doctor because it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me that just from the way that I look at it, it feels that in science, you're always
[Amit Varma]: moving forward, even if it's a little forward incrementally, but you're moving forward.
[Amit Varma]: While in medicine, it seems that you're running to stand still, you're always trying to kind
[Amit Varma]: of figure out what is the latest and kind of apply that.
[Amit Varma]: So how has that process of thinking these things through been for you?
[Guest]: So I think when people begin, no matter what they begin in terms of their career, I think
[Guest]: everybody has a very big canvas in mind, they always think that, you know, they're going
[Guest]: to change the world in some way.
[Guest]: So if you, you know, if you met someone like, if you met me when I was in my 10th grade
[Guest]: or my 12th grade and said, you know, what is evidence based medicine?
[Guest]: Do you know how, how will you make decisions when it comes to patient care?
[Guest]: I think there was no concept of, of anything like that at that point of time, in the sense
[Guest]: in on my radar, right?
[Guest]: So most, most of the decisions are made in terms of what kind of a person do you want
[Guest]: to be?
[Guest]: So I was, I was always attracted to this concept of just working hard and giving it your best,
[Guest]: no matter what.
[Guest]: And, you know, let things take care of themselves, you know, don't, don't be obsessed about how
[Guest]: much money you're making.
[Guest]: Don't be obsessed about what, what is the so-called return on investment, you know,
[Guest]: which is, which is the whole argument against medicine, right?
[Guest]: Which everyone reminds you again and again that, you know, when are you going to make
[Guest]: money?
[Guest]: And the worst is when you're like around 24 years old, you know, where all your friends,
[Guest]: the last bencher in your school is also suddenly joined the merchant Navy and he's making like
[Guest]: 20 times the amount that you are.
[Guest]: And everybody points out that you've clearly made the wrong decision.
[Guest]: So I think this, this decision comes from a place of, I think a larger principle that,
[Guest]: you know, you enjoy at some level helping people.
[Guest]: I don't necessarily mean in an altruistic way, or I don't mean it, I don't mean it in
[Guest]: a, in a charitable way.
[Guest]: I mean it in a way that, you know, somebody comes to you with some sort of a problem,
[Guest]: you are able to give them some sort of an instant relief, you are able to give them
[Guest]: solace in some way.
[Guest]: And that turnaround time is rapid enough that you get the feedback, you feel good about
[Guest]: it, you feel that you are making a difference on micro levels.
[Guest]: And I think that's the model, or that's the goal that people are attracted to at that
[Guest]: stage when, you know, early on.
[Guest]: Now whether that will cause a big dent in the world, possibly not, you know, but I think
[Guest]: those little joys on a day to day basis, where even though, you know, as you rightly pointed
[Guest]: out, you're running to stay in the same place when you look at the macro picture, but at
[Guest]: the micro picture, you're making small moves every single day, which, which give you a
[Guest]: lot of instant gratification, which a lot of other fields possibly don't get.
[Guest]: You know, if you're, and this is my perspective, and I could be completely wrong.
[Guest]: But say if you're a software engineer, and you're designing software, maybe when the
[Guest]: product is finally ready one year down the road, you get a lot of gratification and you
[Guest]: get a lot of sense of achievement.
[Guest]: But during that one year, it's probably every single day is, is, is tough, you know, because
[Guest]: you're just writing code maybe.
[Guest]: But but for a doctor, I think there are a lot of small joys in every single day.
[Guest]: And I think that's what drives a lot of us, especially in your early years, because you've
[Guest]: seen you've yourself gone to a doctor at some point of time, you've yourself realized that
[Guest]: they give you some sort of a salve, some sort of a relief at that point, which makes you
[Guest]: feel good.
[Guest]: And I think I think that process is something which is very attractive.
[Amit Varma]: That's really interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Because I mean, when you think about it, the world is a positive someplace.
[Amit Varma]: And we benefit when others benefit, mostly unless you know, you're in the government
[Amit Varma]: or you're in seeking or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But for most of us, the benefit that comes from our work is unseen, it's like really
[Amit Varma]: the scene in the unseen, that it's way down the road, like you said, if a software engineer
[Amit Varma]: designed some software, even when the software is out there, he can't really see the benefit,
[Amit Varma]: he doesn't know how much difference is few lines of code made.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe if he works in Microsoft, maybe that's what made Windows hang.
[Amit Varma]: But in your case, it's a little more immediate, which is fascinating to me.
[Amit Varma]: It also sort of strikes me that, you know, when we think of experts, when we think of
[Amit Varma]: the professionals, we think of them as people who know their field.
[Amit Varma]: But I think what often happens is in many fields, whether it is medicine or economics
[Amit Varma]: or whatever, in all fields, there's a set of people who are not really actively engaged
[Amit Varma]: in that sense, they are doing the degree, they get the knowledge, and that is a knowledge
[Amit Varma]: they have.
[Amit Varma]: And very often, it's kind of a static kind of knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: And they don't have the intellectual curiosity to maybe apply their frame to other things
[Amit Varma]: and constantly broaden, constantly read all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I noticed this most with some economists, you know, there are really two
[Amit Varma]: kinds of economists, those who are thinking actively about the world.
[Amit Varma]: And those who have done the training, who can make the charts and do the regressions
[Amit Varma]: and all that, but aren't really thinking that actively now with doctors also, it seems to
[Amit Varma]: me that we think of doctors as experts, we have a problem, we go to a doc, doc will solve
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: But very often, you know, a doctor say trained in the 1990s, was trained in what was in many
[Amit Varma]: fields, very outdated knowledge, for example, nutrition, right, where for the longest time
[Amit Varma]: for decades, you know, the sugar lobby funded all these studies at Harvard and all that
[Amit Varma]: in the 1950s and 60s.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, fat was demonized, sugar was supposed to be okay.
[Amit Varma]: And the American government released guidelines to this effect in the late 1970s.
[Amit Varma]: And their obesity epidemic begins from there.
[Amit Varma]: And in something like the last 10 to 15 years, it's kind of become common knowledge that
[Amit Varma]: all of this is kind of rubbish, we've been obsessing over the wrong things, sugar is
[Amit Varma]: the real problem.
[Amit Varma]: Now, one of my friends went to a doctor recently to ask about nutrition.
[Amit Varma]: And he got that old dogma, because she hadn't read up and updated herself on the state of
[Amit Varma]: the science.
[Amit Varma]: So a two part question really that when you were studying, did you notice this difference
[Amit Varma]: in approach that there are people who just want to understand what is in the books and
[Amit Varma]: do well in the exams.
[Amit Varma]: And there are people who are naturally curious, who are reading more, and therefore who are
[Amit Varma]: more likely in future to stay updated with whatever the state of the science is.
[Guest]: I think part of that is the problem in which medical education occurs.
[Guest]: And you know, it's very fact heavy.
[Guest]: So let's look at medical textbooks, right?
[Guest]: So I mean, most of us have this God textbook for every subject under the sun.
[Guest]: So if you're studying anatomy, this is the God textbook.
[Guest]: If you're studying physiology, this is the God textbook.
[Guest]: Now, I've been part of a process of knowing how textbooks are written.
[Guest]: And if you look at how textbooks are written, the time gap between when the decision to
[Guest]: write the textbook begins to the textbook actually being published is usually around
[Guest]: two to three years.
[Guest]: So when it actually gets published, some of the stuff was current and relevant three years
[Guest]: ago and is probably already been surpassed by newer knowledge or superseded by a newer
[Guest]: study which has happened.
[Guest]: So if you bank completely on textbooks, you're not going to get state of the art knowledge.
[Guest]: However, medical education gives a lot of focus on textbooks.
[Guest]: So that's one example where you are taught to keep sticking to the facts which are written
[Guest]: in the textbook that's written in stone because it's this God textbook.
[Guest]: It's this Bible of a particular subject.
[Guest]: You are not taught the methodology to critique things.
[Guest]: You are taught to remember the facts.
[Guest]: You are not really trained in how to critique facts.
[Guest]: So if that training comes into play, then you would have this healthy discussion which
[Guest]: would constantly happen, which happens in academia, right?
[Guest]: Where somebody says something and another person points out and says, but listen, there
[Guest]: was this newer study which was published just two days ago.
[Guest]: Have you gone through it?
[Guest]: And that constant debate, that constant being the constant chatter among academics, which
[Guest]: makes one realize that, you know, you need to constantly update yourself is very often
[Guest]: lacking in medical schools.
[Guest]: That is a big problem.
[Guest]: So that you are not taught really to question.
[Guest]: Now whether that divides the world into two parts, I don't think it's that straightforward.
[Guest]: I think most of us with a medical education come out again with the same concepts of truths
[Guest]: being absolutely written in stone.
[Guest]: It's when you start practicing, if you are curious enough, if you realize that, you know,
[Guest]: every patient does not fit into a particular mold, if you start questioning why something's
[Guest]: happening in a certain way when you expected it to happen the other way, if you then get
[Guest]: into a process of constantly searching, constantly reviewing the literature, I think that that
[Guest]: makes a lot of difference.
[Guest]: Now part of that is also a function of time.
[Guest]: So it is extremely difficult for doctors to continuously update themselves, which is why
[Guest]: it would be nice if there were simpler guidelines, right?
[Guest]: I mean, that's what we all want.
[Guest]: We want some sort of a guideline that's constantly updated, or some sort of a course which we
[Guest]: can attend once a year where we get updated and change our practice.
[Guest]: Now expecting a practicing doctor to be able to continuously update themselves is a tough
[Guest]: task.
[Guest]: And the way it works, unfortunately or unfortunately, in medicine is that the older you get, the
[Guest]: more senior you get, your patient base increases and, you know, there's word of mouth, there's
[Guest]: a general awareness of a particular doctor of a particular specialty being there.
[Guest]: And that just means that you're getting busier and busier and therefore having lesser and
[Guest]: lesser time to update yourself.
[Guest]: And unfortunately, this then becomes a common trajectory for a lot of doctors and, you know,
[Guest]: even I hope this doesn't happen to me, but that's the natural drift, unfortunately, that
[Guest]: you get busy, you get popular, you get more patients, less time to read, and gradually
[Guest]: you start doing things which are outdated.
[Guest]: And I think this needs to be rethought, you know, we need to figure out a way to get out
[Amit Varma]: of this.
[Amit Varma]: And how does one keep in touch with latest research then?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is the internet a game changer there?
[Amit Varma]: Because I would assume that pre the internet for a practicing doctor to want to keep in
[Amit Varma]: touch with the latest in the field, especially if you're in India, and all the latest research
[Amit Varma]: and all that is happening in the US is incredibly difficult, but now it should be kind of easier.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your practices like, are there journals you go to, do you spend a certain
[Amit Varma]: amount of time reading papers?
[Amit Varma]: Do you tell yourself that X percent of the time I must devote to updating myself or,
[Amit Varma]: you know, leveling up?
[Guest]: How does that process kind of work for you?
[Guest]: So I think one of the best ways of keeping yourself updated on the literature is having
[Guest]: students, right?
[Guest]: And I have the luxury of having students, I'm at a teaching institute.
[Guest]: So when you teach students, you automatically update yourself on the latest literature.
[Guest]: If you inculcate that hunger in them, students have this natural questioning hunger, which
[Guest]: they will, you know, they will pose questions to you on rounds sometimes saying that, you
[Guest]: know, is this the right way of doing things?
[Guest]: And that again, needs to be fostered.
[Guest]: If you go by the didactic method, that it's my way or the highway, you know, this is right
[Guest]: because boss says so, you will end up having your knowledge not updated because, you know,
[Guest]: where you are at is where you will be.
[Guest]: Your students will not question you and you will keep perpetuating the same cycle.
[Guest]: If you have students who constantly ask you or, and you can ask them as well, you know,
[Guest]: why don't you read up on this and tell me more about this, that exchange keeps you updated
[Guest]: and it's very useful.
[Guest]: But then again, I have the luxury of being in a teaching institute.
[Guest]: If you're not at a teaching institute, fortunately, there are a lot of, I don't know what they're
[Guest]: called.
[Guest]: They probably like meta websites, which have started compiling literature from all the
[Guest]: available evidence.
[Guest]: And, you know, the thing that comes to mind, which I use on a day-to-day basis is something
[Guest]: called up-to-date.
[Guest]: So up-to-date is a website, which also has an app on your phone now, where they get experts
[Guest]: in a particular field to write a particular topic and that expert will cover the topic
[Guest]: through and through.
[Guest]: The experts are also incentivized to update it every year or so.
[Guest]: I think, you know, they're actually paid, I know, because some of my supervisors have
[Guest]: written topics here and they're incentivized to keep updating the topic.
[Guest]: So supposing I have this patient sitting in front of me who I think has this rare lung
[Guest]: disorder and I've, you know, the last time I've seen a patient with something like this
[Guest]: was about three years back.
[Guest]: So clearly I'm not going to be by default updated on the literature because it's not
[Guest]: being on my radar.
[Guest]: I haven't actively searched for this disease.
[Guest]: So I go to up-to-date, I open it and very often, you know, I will come to know if there's
[Guest]: a new drug available, if there's a new therapy that has been tried somewhere, there are links
[Guest]: sometimes which will take me to earlier studies, and then I can choose to go into a deep dive.
[Guest]: So up-to-date will summarize what the literature is, give me the references for those papers.
[Guest]: I can then go and dig out those papers myself, critique those papers, see if they make sense
[Guest]: and summarize.
[Guest]: But this is not as easy as it sounds in the sense that you're trying to do all of this
[Guest]: in the middle of an OPD, in the middle of a clinic.
[Guest]: So I have sometimes told patients, let me read up.
[Guest]: I open this in front of the patient and I do it, but I can see how a lot of people would
[Guest]: feel that doing that would make the patient question their credentials.
[Guest]: So I think we need to also create a healthy atmosphere where, you know, the doctor doesn't
[Guest]: know all the answers.
[Guest]: The doctor will update his knowledge if necessary in front of you.
[Guest]: The doctor is someone who will give you the best knowledge as of today.
[Guest]: How he gets there could be a journey, could involve some time on your part.
[Guest]: He doesn't need to be an encyclopedia with all the answers ready.
[Guest]: As long as we start moving to that modality where even patients accept that, you know,
[Guest]: accept a doctor who's searching in front of them, accept a doctor who says, I don't know.
[Guest]: I think that's great.
[Guest]: So when I talk to my friends and relatives, I tell them very often that the doctor you
[Guest]: want is the doctor who once in a while says, I don't know the answer to this question.
[Guest]: If you have a doctor who knows the answer to every question, then that's, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, it could be exceptionally good, of course, but, you know, that would be a rarity.
[Amit Varma]: You know, this leads me into a digression on what patients really expect from their
[Amit Varma]: doctors.
[Amit Varma]: And I think in India, at least, they expect a veneer of knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: They expect their doctor to be like an expert, to have the definitive answers, to give them
[Amit Varma]: medicines.
[Amit Varma]: Look, you know, as you have also pointed out in the past, this is what leads to overprescription
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: I remember I read an episode on healthcare with the economist Karthik Murali Tharan and
[Amit Varma]: he referred to this study in 2007, where, you know, the author of the study asked a
[Amit Varma]: doctor in a slum so that, you know, when someone has diarrhea, what do you give them?
[Amit Varma]: And the person listed out a bunch of medicines.
[Amit Varma]: And then the guy asked that, you know, why don't you just give them oral rehydration?
[Amit Varma]: Because that's enough.
[Amit Varma]: That's what WHO recommends.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, no, because then they won't come to me, they've come to a doctor, they expect
[Amit Varma]: a bunch of medicines.
[Amit Varma]: That's what I do.
[Amit Varma]: If I don't do that, they'll go to someone else, I lose income.
[Amit Varma]: And that's something, by the way, in India that it's not just doctors, it's we expect
[Amit Varma]: all our experts to be full of certainty, while the truth is that those who know the most
[Amit Varma]: will have the least certainty because they'll know how much they don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas, you know, it's a Dunning-Kruger effect that it's often the fools who have the greatest
[Amit Varma]: certainty, not to say that doctors are necessarily like that.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you feel about this?
[Amit Varma]: Do you feel that there is also this kind of interaction where you not only have to find
[Amit Varma]: the best treatment, but you also have to live up to the patient's expectations?
[Amit Varma]: So is it like a game theoretic problem somewhere where there are trade-offs you have to consider?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I couldn't agree more.
[Guest]: So you gave a context in which you have a diagnosis.
[Guest]: I often have to face a situation where I tell the patient, listen, we need to do a few tests,
[Guest]: you know, we'll do these tests, we'll meet up again with the results of these tests.
[Guest]: And then we'll talk about what needs to be done.
[Guest]: And on their way out, they very often will turn back and say, but what have you given
[Guest]: me in treatment today?
[Guest]: And I need to tell them that I don't know what you have, you know, I genuinely don't
[Guest]: know what you have.
[Guest]: How can I treat you if I don't know what you have?
[Guest]: And they still will very often insist that, you know, but just give me something for today.
[Guest]: You know, it's almost like this whole interaction is incomplete till there is a prescription
[Guest]: prescribing drugs.
[Guest]: You know, it's not just a prescription with tests.
[Guest]: It has to be a prescription prescribing drugs because I've come to you with a problem and
[Guest]: you have to give me a fix in some way.
[Guest]: So I completely empathize, you know, so there is no judgment on my part when I see doctors,
[Guest]: you know, starting off people on a bunch of medications or doctors being forced to order
[Guest]: tests sometimes, because we've created this sort of a culture where, you know, a doctor
[Guest]: who prescribes a lot and I get better is the right doctor.
[Guest]: The doctor who says take nothing, even if I get better, but he didn't give me anything.
[Guest]: So it's not, it's basul nahi hua, as you say in Hindi, you know, there was, it didn't complete
[Guest]: the interaction.
[Guest]: What did I pay him so much for?
[Guest]: You know, why did I waste my time going there?
[Guest]: I didn't get anything out of it.
[Guest]: So I think this is a genuine problem.
[Guest]: And I think we need to start thinking in terms of how to let people know that medicines are
[Guest]: not a solution for every problem.
[Guest]: And going on and on indefinitely with medicines are also not a solution, you know.
[Guest]: And there are some problems which can be fixed.
[Guest]: There are some problems to which, you know, there are no solutions sometimes you just
[Guest]: have to have to accept that.
[Guest]: I mean, we talk about all these fancy things and, you know, cutting edge stuff and doing
[Guest]: scans while as you look at respiratory medicine, something as simple as cough.
[Guest]: You know, there are people who are doing PhDs in cough as of today, you know, after centuries
[Guest]: and centuries of coughing, we still don't know what really causes cough in certain circumstances.
[Guest]: We still don't know where the receptors exactly might be.
[Guest]: We still don't know what is the drug that will actually work.
[Guest]: I remember meeting this world expert in cough and he runs a cough clinic.
[Guest]: And I said, you know, how do you, there was a particular example I gave him and I said,
[Guest]: how do you treat it?
[Guest]: So he says, listen, my clinic's very busy.
[Guest]: So I cannot, you know, see people frequently.
[Guest]: So I can see them maybe once a month.
[Guest]: So I take any four random drugs which work on cough generally.
[Guest]: I say if week one you try this, if this doesn't work, week two you try this, if that doesn't
[Guest]: work, week three you try this, if that doesn't work, week four you try this.
[Guest]: And he says, for all you know, nature cures them at some point of time and then the patient
[Guest]: attributes the cure to that last medication, you know.
[Guest]: So that's how it is.
[Guest]: You know, people want some sort of a medicine as a solution for every problem.
[Guest]: And I think we need to do something to counter that.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, you know, what you said reminded me of the common phenomenon of regression
[Amit Varma]: to the mean, right?
[Amit Varma]: Like, why do, for example, people think homeopathy works?
[Amit Varma]: Part of it is, of course, a placebo effect, but part of it is if you take homeopathy for
[Amit Varma]: something that's going to get better anyway, you will ascribe causation.
[Amit Varma]: You will say, oh, this cured me.
[Amit Varma]: And this could also be true of any cocktail of medicines that the doctor gives you for
[Amit Varma]: a particular point where you got better on your own, but hey, you feel this worked and
[Amit Varma]: you know, you will give credit to the medicine and therefore to the doctor.
[Amit Varma]: And this, of course, happens in politics also where, you know, Amit Shah recently came out
[Amit Varma]: and said that, you know, Narendra Modi ji has solved the second wave.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm like, that's regression to the mean, right?
[Amit Varma]: The second wave at some point in time would have gone down in the most extreme case with
[Amit Varma]: everyone dying, but whatever happens, a wave would have gone down.
[Amit Varma]: So the fact of it going down alone is not reason enough to take credit.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't want to draw you into that kind of political stuff.
[Amit Varma]: What am I even doing?
[Amit Varma]: A couple of interesting things, like one thing that sort of strikes me is that when it comes
[Amit Varma]: to the practice of medicine itself, especially I'm assuming in a place like India, I think
[Amit Varma]: two things would happen for a doctor and I'm just sort of thinking aloud and you can enlighten
[Amit Varma]: me on whether these processes actually happen and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: One is because you're seeing a multiple number of patients and you do not have unlimited
[Amit Varma]: time for each one, you develop these what economists call fast and frugal heuristics
[Amit Varma]: by which you figure out that, okay, this is the symptom and this is likely to be the most
[Amit Varma]: common cause for it.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, let me try this and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And how does that process work?
[Amit Varma]: Because initially as a young person, you must be enthusiastic, you want to get to the root
[Amit Varma]: of everything.
[Amit Varma]: Is there a point in time when you realize that in practical terms, it is not possible
[Amit Varma]: and I'll let you answer this first and then I'll go on to my next one.
[Guest]: So that's again the unfortunate part of medicine, you know, the better you get, the more successful
[Guest]: you get, the larger the volume of patients you have, the larger the volume of patients
[Guest]: you have, the lesser time you spend with each one of them.
[Guest]: And then, you know, exactly what you said, you're pretty much triaging in your head.
[Guest]: Is this person in dire need for some emergent treatment or is this person not so bad where,
[Guest]: you know, we can just quickly give him something, send him off, you know, maybe nature takes
[Guest]: care of it.
[Guest]: Maybe he gets better and he comes back.
[Guest]: If it doesn't, then he comes back to me and maybe that second time round is where I really
[Guest]: spend more time because now I realize that, you know, that quick three minute consult
[Guest]: wasn't good enough.
[Guest]: I completely agree with you, you know, the unfortunate part of becoming successful and
[Guest]: being good at something, in medicine especially, is that eventually it leads to large volumes.
[Guest]: And I think one of the ways in which you can solve this problem is by having a team.
[Guest]: So if you have a good second rung, if you have a good bunch of assistants working with
[Guest]: you, kind of filter things out, you know, give you a brief, quick summary of what's
[Guest]: happening and then you act on that summary, I think that makes a big difference.
[Guest]: Because otherwise, you know, exactly what you said, it becomes like quick algorithms.
[Guest]: Everything becomes algorithmic and whoever doesn't fit into that algorithm is a problem.
[Guest]: So let me give you an example.
[Guest]: You know, since we're talking about COVID-19, so one of the things that has been a common
[Guest]: problem over the past year is individuals who've come to me with breathlessness who
[Guest]: are actually sighing, you know, because of anxiety, you take a deep breath and you breathe
[Guest]: out and that, you know, there are natural processes which lower your heart rate when
[Guest]: you do that.
[Guest]: There are natural processes which calm you when you do that.
[Guest]: So it's almost like an epidemic of sighing that I've seen over the past year.
[Guest]: And these individuals, if you go down that same algorithmic route, somebody says they
[Guest]: are breathless, you know, do a whole bunch of tests, you know, and then find nothing
[Guest]: wrong.
[Guest]: Then you try some inhaler, you try something, I mean, you can completely go down that route.
[Guest]: But very often, if you just spend like 30 seconds looking at that person and talking
[Guest]: to that person, you will realize that during that conversation itself, the person sighs
[Guest]: a couple of times, and you realize that the person is in a hospital, the person is anxious,
[Guest]: and clearly that person is sighing.
[Guest]: You ask them when they sleep at night, do they sigh or get up breathless?
[Guest]: And the answer to that is almost always no.
[Guest]: So clearly, you know, whatever the problem is, is not happening at night, which again
[Guest]: points towards a psychological problem, something that's making the person anxious.
[Guest]: And again, you know, this is why it's important to spend time.
[Guest]: This is why it's important to observe patients and realize what's happening.
[Amit Varma]: This is mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: An epidemic of sighing.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Another question.
[Amit Varma]: My last episode was with Kavita Krishnan, and in that we briefly spoke about Mary Wollstonecraft,
[Amit Varma]: the great feminist author of the early 19th century or the late 18th century, really.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the tragedies there is that she died young because she died during childbirth.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, she gave birth to Mary Shelley, who would later marry the poet, and she died three
[Amit Varma]: days after childbirth, I think because the doctor didn't wash his hands, right?
[Amit Varma]: Because that basic protocol was not known at the time.
[Amit Varma]: That is something that happened in the middle of the 19th century.
[Amit Varma]: Ignaz Semmelweis said that, you know, correlated not washing hands to disease and people ignored
[Amit Varma]: him for decades.
[Amit Varma]: And I think if I remember correctly, he died in a lunatic asylum eventually.
[Amit Varma]: Something really sad like that.
[Amit Varma]: And that eventually got figured out.
[Amit Varma]: But that was also the reason that around that time, things like homeopathy and all that
[Amit Varma]: alternative medicines became common, because at least they weren't harming people.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, of course, there is harm in terms of the opportunity cost.
[Amit Varma]: You don't get some other treatment if you take sugar pills, but they weren't harming
[Amit Varma]: people.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas if you went to a hospital, your chances of dying were insanely high because evidence
[Amit Varma]: based medicine, as it were, was simply not at that stage of advancement.
[Amit Varma]: Now, that, of course, has changed.
[Amit Varma]: And today it is.
[Amit Varma]: But for most things, how important would you say these processes still are internalizing
[Amit Varma]: them and with the washing of hands being the most basic example.
[Amit Varma]: But if you think of do no harm, just kind of internalizing them and going with that,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there's a great quote, I forget by whom some famous doctor you might know.
[Amit Varma]: I just read this recently on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: I think Anirban Mahapatra quoted this person in his episode with me on COVID-19, where
[Amit Varma]: he said that at its core, every medicine is a poison.
[Amit Varma]: So to what extent does the do no harm imperative of the physician go in both in terms of processes
[Amit Varma]: or best practices like washing hands and all of that, and also just being aware that listen,
[Amit Varma]: I'm expected to give a cocktail of medicines to this person, but all of them have side
[Amit Varma]: effects, all of them can do harm in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: Like we are finding out and we'll discuss COVID-19 later.
[Amit Varma]: But if you give steroids too early, that depresses the immune system and chances are your fever
[Amit Varma]: will go down.
[Amit Varma]: But COVID will hit you really hard after that happens, which has happened in so many cases.
[Amit Varma]: So how much of a part is just being aware of what not to do as much as what to do?
[Guest]: I think it's extremely important to not trivialize any medicine.
[Guest]: You know, for some reason, we have this concept of safe medicines and unsafe medicines.
[Guest]: And what you said is absolutely right.
[Guest]: It's the dose that determines what a poison is.
[Guest]: I think there's a Latin quote which says that.
[Guest]: You know, things like vitamin D, for example, you can overdose on vitamin D when given as
[Guest]: an injection.
[Guest]: And we've seen patients get admitted with hypervitaminosis D, which is a real thing.
[Guest]: You know, it causes confusion, it causes a lot of problems.
[Guest]: So even things which are seemingly innocuous may not necessarily be innocuous, may not
[Guest]: be innocuous for a particular person, right?
[Guest]: It may be okay for 99.
[Guest]: So that's another aspect.
[Guest]: Number one, it may not be innocuous for anyone.
[Guest]: Number two, maybe what if there is a subset of people in whom it doesn't react well.
[Guest]: And we just prescribe it assuming that, you know, these words which are used, you know,
[Guest]: safe, vitamins, immunity boosters, you know, things that give a person a sense of something
[Guest]: is being done.
[Guest]: And because by virtue of something being done, I'm going to be in a better place than I was
[Guest]: prior to receiving this.
[Guest]: And yes, there is a placebo effect.
[Guest]: You know, people do feel better with a lot of different things.
[Guest]: And that is a challenge for a doctor as well, you know, in terms of, should I give something
[Guest]: because that something will act like a placebo and make this person feel better.
[Guest]: And therefore, you know, my obligation to be a caregiver of some sort should not supersede
[Guest]: my obligation to just be absolutely right and proper about not unnecessarily prescribing
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: So that's the balance that you have to find.
[Guest]: So if somebody comes to me and somebody comes to another doctor, we're talking about a counterfactual,
[Guest]: where the other doctor gives the patient a vitamin, the patient suddenly feels a boost
[Guest]: of energy, he or she is happy, they go back feeling extremely satisfied versus the patient
[Guest]: coming to me, I say, you know, you have nothing wrong with you, please go away, in the nicest
[Guest]: way possible, of course.
[Guest]: But you know, that person continues to suffer in some way, who's to say who's right in this
[Guest]: circumstance, right?
[Guest]: This is where the challenge lies, you know, the effect of placebos, should it really mean
[Guest]: something to a doctor as well to give a placebo, but based on the fact that we are scientists
[Guest]: and based on the fact that we hold on to science, for everything that we do, I think we shouldn't
[Guest]: be doing anything without a strong rational reason or scientific basis that suggests that
[Guest]: something is going to work.
[Guest]: And you know, I'm equally passionate making this argument with tests, I mean, possibly
[Guest]: even more than medicines, right?
[Guest]: For me, if I order a test, the outcome of the test must influence my treatment decisions
[Guest]: in some way.
[Guest]: You know, if you look at probability, probabilistically, there was a study done, which shows that if
[Guest]: you did eight random tests without a pretest probability, right?
[Guest]: So not Bayesian, you just randomly just gave anybody eight tests, 20% of the population
[Guest]: that you give those eight tests to would have one abnormal value completely by random chance,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Now, if you increase that to 16 tests, I think it's about 16 or 20 tests, that probability
[Guest]: goes up to about 99%.
[Guest]: So one test will be abnormal completely by random chance.
[Guest]: So if you've asked for a test, you need to know that if the abnormal value comes back,
[Guest]: are you going to do something about it?
[Guest]: And if the answer to that is, I'm not going to do anything about it, you have no business
[Guest]: ordering that test to begin with.
[Guest]: I think the same flavor holds true for medicines as well.
[Guest]: You do not want to give medicines just because you can't leave a prescription blank, or you
[Guest]: don't know what needs to be done.
[Guest]: You give a medicine only when you believe that science has proven in some way that taking
[Guest]: that medicine for that individual will improve his or her odds of getting better as compared
[Guest]: to doing nothing.
[Guest]: I think that should be the guiding light.
[Amit Varma]: And earlier we spoke about doctors responding to incentives from patients in terms of overprescribing
[Amit Varma]: and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But doctors are also prey to other kinds of incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm told this is more of a problem in the north than here.
[Amit Varma]: But I'd like your opinion on it, which is that, look, you're working for a hospital
[Amit Varma]: in different places from whatever doctors will get a commission for every test that
[Amit Varma]: they order.
[Amit Varma]: So they incentivize to order tests, they get a revenue share in whatever their practice
[Amit Varma]: brings in within the hospital.
[Amit Varma]: So they are incentivized towards asking the patient to do maximum tests, which may be
[Amit Varma]: unnecessary with, you know, all kinds of overtreatment.
[Amit Varma]: And I know that just talking about these incentives makes doctors seem like heartless mercenary
[Amit Varma]: beings.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't want to give that impression at all, especially because what I think has become
[Amit Varma]: visible to all of us in the last few months is that our frontline workers in the health
[Amit Varma]: care systems, our doctors, our nurses, and other medical personnel are our heroes.
[Amit Varma]: They are like the firefighters of 9-11.
[Amit Varma]: How do you respond to these incentives and do these incentives exist?
[Amit Varma]: How does someone like you then draw a line and say that, no, I'm not going to do this,
[Amit Varma]: which would immediately hurt your income?
[Guest]: How does one negotiate that?
[Guest]: So I'm honestly fortunate to be in an ecosystem which does not demand any of that to me.
[Guest]: So that makes me very comfortable in terms of what I'm doing.
[Guest]: My hospital is an ethical hospital, there is no pressure.
[Guest]: I can admit somebody, not give them anything and discharge them after five days, and there
[Guest]: will be no questions asked.
[Guest]: That being said, I have heard very often of these incentives being in place.
[Guest]: But you know what I think, Amit, I don't think any doctor begins with a place that they would
[Guest]: want to do that.
[Guest]: I think every doctor possibly starts with a place that, listen, I will do what is indicated,
[Guest]: I will do what's completely ethical.
[Guest]: And if as part of doing something ethical, I get some sort of a bonus or some sort of
[Guest]: kickback, what's so wrong in that?
[Guest]: I think that's the starting point for people who indulge in that.
[Guest]: The problem is, it starts off like that, but this is a line which is very difficult to
[Guest]: walk on, right?
[Guest]: I mean, like any other incentive in life, at what point does the incentive drive the
[Guest]: prescription versus the incentive being incidental to the prescription is where the huge challenge
[Guest]: lies.
[Guest]: And this is true for anyone.
[Guest]: So I mean, you know, I've worked with somebody called Dick Menzies at McGill, who would refuse
[Guest]: to take a pen from a pharmaceutical company.
[Guest]: He would say that the moment I have a pen from a pharmaceutical company, I will be obliged
[Guest]: to do something nice in return to this person.
[Guest]: You know, I've received pens from pharmaceutical companies, and I've never thought of it, because
[Guest]: I believe genuinely that, you know, this is just a pen, this is not going to influence
[Guest]: my practice.
[Guest]: But to be honest, who knows, at a subconscious level, if that particular pen writes really
[Guest]: well, maybe, or that particular pen is something that I'm very fond of.
[Guest]: Maybe at a subconscious level, I will be more inclined to support that particular company
[Guest]: which gave me that pen, you know.
[Guest]: So I think these are inherent to the practice.
[Guest]: I think the extreme version of it would be to completely not accept anything.
[Guest]: But, you know, I think majority of us get into a zone where we honestly believe that,
[Guest]: you know, a little bit here and a little bit there in terms of, you know, a gift for Diwali,
[Guest]: for example, is not going to make so much of a difference.
[Guest]: But that's a very tough, that's a very thin line, you know.
[Guest]: And I think that's a challenge that most doctors face.
[Amit Varma]: Is there a systemic issue here then?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a systemic issue that, look, if you want to set up a hospital, you want to maximize
[Amit Varma]: your revenue because it's obviously expensive to do so.
[Amit Varma]: And this is one way of doing that, that you incentivize the doctors and then it just becomes
[Amit Varma]: a vicious cycle.
[Amit Varma]: And you've pointed out that your hospital, Hinduja Hospital, doesn't do this.
[Amit Varma]: It's a quote-unquote ethical hospital.
[Amit Varma]: So my question then is that, is it possible for new hospitals to come up that are ethical
[Amit Varma]: hospitals or are they putting themselves at a competitive disadvantage with hospitals
[Amit Varma]: that are unethical hospitals as it were?
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure they wouldn't describe themselves that way.
[Guest]: I can imagine that if healthcare is treated like the open market, I can imagine how not
[Guest]: indulging in such practices would hit your bottom line.
[Guest]: I mean, that's straightforward math.
[Guest]: So I can imagine the fact that it's relatively difficult to compete and match up to maybe
[Guest]: the incomes of other individuals in other hospitals if you don't play the game by the
[Guest]: rules that have been established.
[Guest]: So I can see how that could be a problem.
[Guest]: And I think that problem arises when you start dealing with healthcare as you would deal
[Guest]: with anything else in the free market.
[Guest]: And that's the reason, that's the whole conversation around medical ethics, the whole conversation
[Guest]: around why patients need to be protected, etc., comes from this whole asymmetry of knowledge
[Guest]: between doctors and the persons deriving the services.
[Guest]: You cannot treat it in the same way as you would treat any other open market, which is
[Guest]: why all over the world there are safeguards in place to prevent things from happening.
[Guest]: I think that's the bottom line.
[Guest]: There needs to be something in place to prevent it from being a completely open market.
[Guest]: There has to be some sort of regulation.
[Guest]: For example, the same pharmaceutical companies, if you take an example, are completely not
[Guest]: allowed to do a lot of the things in stricter countries that they are allowed to do in a
[Guest]: country like India.
[Guest]: And why has that happened?
[Guest]: Because of the same reason.
[Guest]: The government has realized at some point of time that if you let it open, if you let
[Guest]: it work or function like a free market, it's going to be demand, supply, it's going to
[Guest]: be the same kind of incentivized.
[Guest]: It's going to be not necessarily in the consumer's best interest.
[Guest]: It's going to be in the best interest of the players, you know, and that's why it needs
[Amit Varma]: to be regularized.
[Amit Varma]: I would imagine that, you know, the solution can also come from within the free market.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if you had enough supply, if you had enough, if you had ease of entry and
[Amit Varma]: enough hospitals and all that, then some of them would advertise that we are ethical hospitals
[Amit Varma]: in these ways that, you know, no commissions are given to doctors on ordering tests or
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And then that would also, you know, it would become a competitive advantage instead of
[Amit Varma]: something that you do out of pure idealism.
[Amit Varma]: So that is also possible.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, that's that's a whole different question.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of get back.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I have a bunch of other general questions I'll also come to before we come to COVID.
[Amit Varma]: But I want to now go back earlier in your personal journey, which we left when we took
[Amit Varma]: all these digressions that, you know, you're doing medicine and you're doing MBBS and all
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: What does the journey from that look like?
[Amit Varma]: Like, how do you choose what to specialize in?
[Amit Varma]: You've specialized in respiratory diseases and so on.
[Amit Varma]: You've also spoken a lot on tuberculosis.
[Amit Varma]: I also want to talk to you about sleep because, you know, I watched a presentation of yours
[Amit Varma]: on that on YouTube, and it was extremely enlightening in many TIL moments.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, tell me a bit about your journey that how do you get interested in
[Amit Varma]: these things as opposed to other things?
[Amit Varma]: And then what prompts that next sort of step where it's not just that you've become a doctor,
[Amit Varma]: but you're actually going and doing an MSc in McGill University as you did.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me how you're evolving during these years.
[Guest]: In terms of the choice of specialization, I think very early on, for most of us, if
[Guest]: you speak to most doctors very early on somewhere in the at the end of the first or the second
[Guest]: year, people kind of figure out whether they want to become surgeons or they want to become
[Guest]: physicians.
[Guest]: So I think that's and it's quite fascinating, actually, you know, in terms of personalities,
[Guest]: in terms of, you know, what kind of individuals are drawn towards surgery, what kinds of individuals
[Guest]: are drawn towards medicine, I'm sure it'll make an interesting study someday to do personality
[Guest]: tests and figure out who's drawn to what, even in terms of subjects.
[Guest]: In the first year, we have something called anatomy, physiology and biochemistry.
[Guest]: And very often, the guys who love physiology, end up drifting towards being a physician,
[Guest]: the guys who are hardcore into anatomy, end up drifting towards surgery.
[Guest]: And that kind of plays out further down the course as well.
[Guest]: So I think very early on, physiology is something that fascinated me.
[Guest]: And it still does, you know, just just understanding mechanisms is mind blowing sometimes why something
[Guest]: occurs.
[Guest]: And I think if you really understand physiology, you really understand a lot of medicine, you
[Guest]: don't, you don't need, you know, superlative knowledge in terms of medications and drugs,
[Guest]: as long as you understand the basics of why what happens.
[Guest]: So I love physiology, I had a distinction in physiology, it was one of my favorite subjects.
[Guest]: And I think that pretty much decided that I was going to be a physician.
[Guest]: I also am a lazy guy.
[Guest]: So standing in one place for like six hours was was not for me.
[Guest]: So that so that got decided early on.
[Guest]: Now at the end of your MBBS, it's the same fight again, right, a whole big pool of really
[Guest]: smart people, all of them trying to get into coveted fields.
[Guest]: I think a decent chunk of us end up in fields that we get rather than the fields that we
[Guest]: initially want.
[Guest]: The good thing about medicine, though, is that if you really like questioning things,
[Guest]: if you really get excited about the body, and you know, small processes here and there,
[Guest]: really, no matter what you decide to become, and where you end up being, where you end
[Guest]: up being can be equally fascinating, equally interesting.
[Guest]: Because if you take a deep dive into any particular field, I think it can be fascinating.
[Guest]: So in my last year, I mean, I was, I fully knew that I was going to become a physician.
[Guest]: But I had this gynecology professor who was really, really passionate about teaching.
[Guest]: And I was completely in love with the subject in terms of, you know, I eventually got a
[Guest]: distinction in the subject, I would read, I would, you know, attend labor, you know,
[Guest]: watch things happen, be really passionate about gynecology fully knowing fully well,
[Guest]: that this is not what I was going to become.
[Guest]: And I think that's the passion that a good teacher, you know, instills in you that teaches
[Guest]: you things about a field that you may not even be interested in pursuing, but you realize
[Guest]: is fascinating.
[Guest]: So again, to come back to the question, I initially wanted to do internal medicine,
[Guest]: that was a broader, you know, head to toe, get an idea of physiology, how everything
[Guest]: works in terms of the body systems, and then, you know, possibly super specialize in something
[Guest]: else eventually.
[Guest]: But again, you know, I mean, as usual, I didn't get into the first field of choice, I got
[Guest]: into respiratory medicine purely by chance.
[Guest]: So I was doing a presentation, I was working at Hinduja, it was a job that I was doing
[Guest]: post MBBS, I was doing a presentation and Dr. Udwadia, who was the chest physician at
[Guest]: Hinduja walked in and listened to the presentation at the end of it, he came up to me and he
[Guest]: said, you know, that was a great presentation, etc.
[Guest]: And I interviewed for medicine, I didn't make it into medicine.
[Guest]: And then the respiratory interviews were happening.
[Guest]: And I interviewed and, and it just worked out, it just worked out because he remembered
[Guest]: me from this random presentation, you know, so it was just, it was good fortune.
[Guest]: That being said, you know, I mean, respiratory medicine is very hardcore to physiology, it's
[Guest]: very hardcore to internal medicine, it's very central to other body systems as well.
[Guest]: So I completely enjoyed my residency.
[Guest]: So my residency was at Hinduja.
[Guest]: And again, there is a general perception of public institutes being much better than private
[Guest]: institutes.
[Guest]: And, you know, so again, my first choice would have been a public institute had everything
[Guest]: aligned the way it should have.
[Guest]: But it didn't, I got into a private institute.
[Guest]: But I must say, I mean, the kind of education that I got here for three years was was really
[Guest]: defining in a lot of different ways, you know, we had Dr. Udwadia and Dr. Mahasur, both of
[Guest]: them senior, both of them very good Dr. Mahasur, who was the head of department of KEM.
[Guest]: So he came from a public institute, he had served most of his life in a public institute.
[Guest]: And Dr. Udwadia, who was at the frontier of research, he was somebody who was very passionate
[Guest]: about research.
[Guest]: We did this study in 2010, we basically took 106 different practitioners were practicing
[Guest]: in a slum of Mumbai.
[Guest]: This was Dharavi.
[Guest]: And we asked them to fill up a prescription for a person with a standard weight.
[Guest]: So I think we said the weight was 60 kilos, a person with 60 kilos came and sat in front
[Guest]: of you and he has tuberculosis, write up a prescription.
[Guest]: That was our that was kind of what we requested them to do.
[Guest]: And 106 practitioners, if I remember right, wrote 64 different prescriptions, out of which
[Guest]: six were what we consider to be accurate and right based on the current guidelines then.
[Guest]: So six of 106 were accurate.
[Guest]: So that was an eye opener as well, and that was when we realized it also opened my eyes
[Guest]: in terms of tuberculosis and realizing that about 70% of the population, 70 to 80% of
[Guest]: the population approached the private health care system first when they wanted treatment
[Guest]: for tuberculosis.
[Guest]: And most of our data, most of our information, most of our guidelines, everything was directed
[Guest]: towards the public health care system.
[Guest]: So it was this mismatch where everybody thinks about the private health care system as being
[Guest]: driven by incentives, not being kosher in a lot of different ways.
[Guest]: And yet, number one, you know, it seemed like patients were preferring us.
[Guest]: And number two, there was this chaos in terms of prescriptions, in terms of the way medicine
[Guest]: was practiced.
[Guest]: So that was a big eye opener in terms of research, you know, that was that was the first major
[Guest]: publication that I had, and you know, it got me passionate about TB.
[Guest]: The other side, of course, was Dr. Mahasur, who taught me some really great things in
[Guest]: terms of how to take care of patients.
[Guest]: So Dr. Mahasur would insist, you know, we would go on rounds and, you know, I would
[Guest]: start saying, 31-year-old patient who's this, this, this, and you would suddenly stop you
[Guest]: and say, what's the name of the patient?
[Guest]: And then all of a sudden, you'd realize that you were caught in the back foot, you didn't
[Guest]: know the name of the patient, because, you know, everything was just details, right?
[Guest]: You're taught to be detail oriented.
[Guest]: And he was very insistent that we knew every patient by name, we knew a little more about
[Guest]: them in terms of their background, we knew what their social circumstances were.
[Guest]: And I think that was fantastic.
[Guest]: That was an eye opener.
[Guest]: I remember a situation where we had this elderly lady who was admitted forever, you know, one
[Guest]: of those patients was not getting discharged, and Dr. Mahasur would come on rounds.
[Guest]: And we would pretty much not do anything.
[Guest]: So you know, as residents, you want to have as less work as possible, or you want to be
[Guest]: streamlined.
[Guest]: And we would constantly wonder, you know, why is this lady there, we're not doing anything
[Guest]: for her.
[Guest]: And then one fine day, he told us about the story about how she had problems at home and
[Guest]: how she wasn't accepted at home, and how she didn't have a caregiver at home, and the moment
[Guest]: she went home, she would deteriorate, things wouldn't work out for her, because there was
[Guest]: nobody to take care of her.
[Guest]: And he pretty much knew everything about the family, you know, which we, despite the fact
[Guest]: that we spent every single day with her, hadn't bothered asking her about at all.
[Guest]: So I think this balance was great, you know, the balance of cutting edge, you know, trying
[Guest]: to identify the big questions in research, trying to really work on changing the world
[Guest]: in some ways, while at the same time being completely grounded to the reality that at
[Guest]: the end of the day, you know, we are caregivers at the end of the day, you can be all evidence
[Guest]: based medicine if you want, but if you don't provide comfort to patients in some way, you're
[Guest]: not necessarily a good doctor.
[Guest]: So I think that made a big difference in terms of my training as far as respiratory medicine
[Amit Varma]: goes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so, you know, in my episode with Karthik on healthcare, we'd kind of discussed a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of studies.
[Amit Varma]: And what they all showed is pretty much what you're pointing out about only six doctors
[Amit Varma]: out of hundred and whatever, kind of getting it right.
[Amit Varma]: And that was true in his studies for both public and private, in fact, public fared
[Amit Varma]: a bit worse.
[Amit Varma]: But my question before we move on is, why did the guys who got it wrong, get it wrong?
[Guest]: That's a difficult question, honestly.
[Guest]: So I think part of that is the fact that people just don't bother updating themselves sometimes.
[Guest]: So maybe they weren't up to speed in terms of what the data was telling them, what the
[Guest]: guidelines were telling them.
[Guest]: Maybe nobody reached them in a way because they were practicing in a place where, you
[Guest]: know, the dissemination of knowledge wasn't a priority.
[Guest]: It was also a disease like tuberculosis, where drugs don't tend to be very expensive.
[Guest]: So pharmaceutical representatives are not coming after you, telling you what you should
[Guest]: prescribe and why you should prescribe it because it's not worth their time or effort.
[Guest]: And I think a part of it is maybe a lot of them just had standard prescriptions.
[Guest]: A lot of TB prescriptions are supposed to be tailored to a person's weight.
[Guest]: And maybe they've just been used to prescribing a certain thing and just having a standard
[Guest]: copy paste prescription for everybody that it just made their lives easier with the volumes
[Guest]: of people they were dealing with.
[Guest]: Maybe that was one of the reasons why that happened.
[Amit Varma]: What also strikes me out of what your wonderful answer a while back was that the study of
[Amit Varma]: medicine can take you in two opposite directions.
[Amit Varma]: That on the one hand, it can make a person in front of you less human because you're
[Amit Varma]: just noting down the details.
[Amit Varma]: This is the age, this is the weight, blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And that's something you need to watch out for.
[Amit Varma]: And as you said, you were fortunate to have a doctor who, you know, made you cognizant
[Amit Varma]: and mindful of these things.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, it can also make them more human in the sense that we look at ourselves
[Amit Varma]: and the people all around us as if everybody's immortal.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we don't consider our own mortality.
[Amit Varma]: And we even take others for granted for that reason.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm guessing that once you start studying medicine, and it becomes explicit to you that
[Amit Varma]: this is a body and this is how the body functions, and eventually it kind of breaks down.
[Amit Varma]: Does that then change the way that you look at others that that veneer of immortality
[Amit Varma]: goes down?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you might, for example, go to a wedding and your aunt will complain about
[Amit Varma]: how your uncle is snoring so much.
[Amit Varma]: At an earlier date, that is just an endearing detail.
[Amit Varma]: But suddenly you are now asking your uncle about his throat muscles, his uvula, does
[Amit Varma]: he sleep on his side or not?
[Amit Varma]: You know, any thoughts on these two, like very different aspects?
[Amit Varma]: You've already commented on the first one where you have to be mindful and treat them
[Amit Varma]: as actual people.
[Amit Varma]: But the other one, does it does it kind of change the way that you look at others and
[Amit Varma]: yourself and your own body that there are things that you would otherwise take for granted
[Amit Varma]: and you see others take for granted, but you don't anymore because you know enough of the
[Amit Varma]: body to know that this is stuff I need to kind of focus on.
[Guest]: So that's the unfortunate part at a certain level, because you look at everything probabilistically,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: You start analyzing everything around you in terms of probabilities.
[Guest]: So if you know that your loved one has a particular disease, you're already calculating probabilities
[Guest]: of hospitalization, probabilities of bad outcomes, probabilities of what might happen.
[Guest]: So you're also a party pooper right at the end of the day, like you rightly pointed out,
[Guest]: you point out things to people who were blissfully unaware of some things and were living a happy
[Guest]: life and now suddenly you've added to the problems on their plate.
[Guest]: And that's a fine balance sometimes because I run a smoking cessation clinic, for example.
[Guest]: Now you know a lot of people who smoke clearly know that it's not good for them.
[Guest]: So you know, catching hold of someone and pointing out the obvious to them is not necessarily
[Guest]: in their best interest.
[Guest]: But you end up nudging people in the right direction, yes, you know, because you're more
[Guest]: sensitized to the fact that, you know, what you are seeing cannot be unseen.
[Guest]: So if you're seeing an individual who clearly, like you said, has a neck, which is bulky,
[Guest]: fits into a certain profile, you know, you're almost tempted to ask, okay, do you snore?
[Guest]: You go down an inquisitive pathway, but I think that has to be done with a lot of sensitivity
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: You know, that's the other thing about life, right?
[Guest]: There is what we call the natural history of disease.
[Guest]: So not everybody with a particular condition is necessarily going to deteriorate.
[Guest]: Not everybody is going to follow a particular trajectory.
[Guest]: So when you're actually eyeballing somebody and screening them, you're in effect doing
[Guest]: a screening test.
[Guest]: And your screening tests are solid only if you know the natural history and you know
[Guest]: that intervening is going to make a difference.
[Guest]: So when I tend to do that, I need to be reasonably certain that I'm giving advice that is going
[Guest]: to possibly alter the trajectory of an individual's life.
[Guest]: Otherwise, it's a little tricky to get into those situations, right?
[Amit Varma]: One of the things that you kind of also then have to do is confront the limits of medicine.
[Amit Varma]: Like the instinct, obviously, is I want to help the patient has come.
[Amit Varma]: The patient also wants medicine, the patient expects treatment.
[Amit Varma]: But sometimes you run into these natural limits where there's not much you can do.
[Amit Varma]: The patient behavior has to change.
[Amit Varma]: You have only so much control over that.
[Amit Varma]: Like when I go to my GP, an endearing gentleman named Dr. Kothari in Lokhandwala, who has
[Amit Varma]: I think 400 Ganesha idols in his office, a lovely gentleman, and one thing he will no
[Amit Varma]: matter what I go to him with, he will tell me that, Amit, stop eating outside food, or
[Amit Varma]: Amit, you must, you know, get enough sleep, both of which are true.
[Amit Varma]: But there's a limit to how much control you have over somebody's behavior, which is one
[Amit Varma]: of the limits of medicine.
[Amit Varma]: And the other limit of medicine is that there are areas in which we simply haven't advanced
[Amit Varma]: enough.
[Amit Varma]: And with a particular disease that are advanced, you know, probabilistically, I mean, you can't
[Amit Varma]: be cold and brutal and tell them that these are the probabilities, you know, at best five
[Amit Varma]: years at worst six months, you know, that becomes difficult.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes there are diseases where, you know, maybe like GERD, for example, where
[Amit Varma]: you can't cure the thing, it's just, you know, it is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: So how does one deal with them?
[Amit Varma]: Because a patient expectation always is of the doctor as a kind of a God who's got a
[Amit Varma]: solution for everything, who better have a solution for everything.
[Guest]: I think empathy plays a very important role in that situation where it's a shared journey,
[Guest]: it's a shared experience, it's not didactic, it's not one way, it's nudging people in the
[Guest]: right direction.
[Guest]: And as you rightly pointed out, a lot of them have already connected the dots when it comes
[Guest]: to lifestyle choices and lifestyle changes.
[Guest]: I think it's useful to just nudge people in the right direction and offer them help wherever
[Guest]: possible.
[Guest]: Smoking cessation, for example, you know, there are medications which help, you know,
[Guest]: and a lot of people aren't aware of these medications.
[Guest]: So we tend to, you know, treat them as you would treat any other disease, there's no
[Guest]: judgment involved, there's no, there's no, you know, point wagging a finger at the person
[Guest]: and saying this is wrong.
[Guest]: You accept the person for who they are, you try to help them to whatever extent.
[Guest]: And then you also, you know, for diseases, as you rightly pointed out, you may not have
[Guest]: a cure.
[Guest]: So you be transparent in that process.
[Guest]: I think it's important not to tell, you know, there is a school of medicine, which constantly
[Guest]: reassures patients.
[Guest]: I very often don't reassure patients in the sense that I say, listen, this is what we
[Guest]: are going to try.
[Guest]: It may or may not work.
[Guest]: If it doesn't work, you know, we will try something else.
[Guest]: I have very often offered patients to go and seek a second opinion.
[Guest]: I say, listen, you know, maybe you should see another doctor, you know, maybe there
[Guest]: are people who've dealt with this in a different way and have met with success.
[Guest]: I don't claim to have all the answers.
[Guest]: I think that's the kind of transparency that's really important.
[Guest]: The other end of the spectrum, and you know, which gets me again, really disturbed is end
[Guest]: of life care.
[Guest]: Where very often I think it's the onus is on the doctor to kind of help the patient
[Guest]: and tell them that listen, this is not a situation in which you need to prolong care, you know,
[Guest]: you feel obliged to prolong care forever.
[Guest]: And that's one thing that really riles me, gets me very disturbed when I see people,
[Guest]: you know, who clearly are not doing well, who clearly are on multiple drugs, multiple
[Guest]: supports.
[Guest]: And you know, the family says just keep going on, keep going on.
[Guest]: I think there's a huge responsibility on the physician to navigate that situation and help
[Guest]: individuals realize this is not what you would want for yourself.
[Guest]: So please don't subject somebody you love to what you're currently doing.
[Guest]: And this is a common theme.
[Guest]: I ask individuals, you know, who have their loved ones on ventilators and multiple supports,
[Guest]: clearly not doing well, you know, I very often ask them, I said, would you want this for
[Guest]: yourself 30 years from now or so, if you were in this situation?
[Guest]: And very often the answer is a very absolute emphatic no.
[Guest]: Then I asked them, would your loved one, you know, had you had this conversation with them
[Guest]: 10 years ago and said, listen, 10 years from now, you will be in this situation, you will
[Guest]: be on multiple supports.
[Guest]: Would you want everything to be done at that point, or would you want us to let you go
[Guest]: at that point?
[Guest]: And they will say, you know, I know my dad, he would definitely not want to be in this
[Guest]: situation.
[Guest]: And yet we perpetuate this, you know, as you rightly said, you know, this is the same analogy
[Guest]: of a disease that has no cure.
[Guest]: There are certain situations where there is no hope, you know, or the hope is such that
[Guest]: the person will never live a meaningful life again.
[Guest]: And I think that's where a physician, the onus is really on us to help individuals make
[Guest]: the right choice.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, there's a there's a great book by Atul Gawande called Being Mortal, which is just
[Amit Varma]: about this.
[Amit Varma]: And it also strikes me that, you know, one thing that people might not think about so
[Amit Varma]: much, but I'm sure you have, and I'm sure doctors do, is that the responsibility is
[Amit Varma]: not just to prolong life, but sometimes also to enhance quality of life.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes there is a trade off.
[Amit Varma]: And what you, you know, must have faced is the difficult situation where you actually
[Amit Varma]: have to tell a patient that, listen, stop the treatment.
[Amit Varma]: What is that situation like, and also in all your years of practice, are there moments
[Amit Varma]: which were difficult for you, that were really hard, that made you wonder that why am I putting
[Amit Varma]: myself through this?
[Amit Varma]: Like, I understand the gratification of helping so many people in small, small ways.
[Amit Varma]: But there are also these painful moments where you can't help them anymore.
[Amit Varma]: So how does one kind of deal with that?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about it.
[Guest]: So this to me is one of the most painful situations.
[Guest]: And unfortunately, it's getting more and more frequent, having to deal with it, you know,
[Guest]: where individuals have reached a point where they clearly are not going to recover, where
[Guest]: they are on multiple supports, where life is just being prolonged, but there's no quality
[Guest]: to that life at all.
[Guest]: And yet modern medicine gives us this whole illusion of keeping a person alive, right?
[Guest]: The word alive itself is very debatable in this context.
[Guest]: I find this extremely difficult to do.
[Guest]: You know, I was reading an article recently, the title of the article was How Doctors Die.
[Guest]: And it was a very interesting article, which talks about how when doctors themselves get
[Guest]: diagnosed with certain conditions, they choose to just go to a house somewhere in the wilderness,
[Guest]: live quietly, spend the last six months, you know, with their family, have quality time
[Guest]: and just pass away quietly, when they themselves have to deal with situations like that.
[Guest]: And yet, you know, we offer a lot more to patients than we should.
[Guest]: Now part of that is, of course, you know, that there is litigation that everybody is
[Guest]: also afraid of, that how could you not do anything in a situation like this, which is
[Guest]: why I think it's very important to have advanced directives, you know, legal advanced directives
[Guest]: in place, if you've thought about it, and if you don't want to be subjected to something
[Guest]: when you reach a point, but in the absence of an advanced directive, you know, most doctors
[Guest]: will end up doing everything that the patient's family tells them to do.
[Guest]: And I find this extremely difficult.
[Guest]: So I've dealt with situations where there were individuals who were leading lives where
[Guest]: they were almost non communicative for five and six years, you know, post after a stroke,
[Guest]: but the loved ones would want to keep on going on, get them admitted frequently.
[Guest]: So there's zero communication, there is no evidence of what we would normally perceive
[Guest]: as being a living human being.
[Guest]: And yet we would keep prolonging the situation just because, you know, the family has resources,
[Guest]: the family has money, the family is ready to pay, you know, so who are you to question
[Guest]: this decision.
[Guest]: And one of the solutions offered in this article written by this doctor was that if you're
[Guest]: uncomfortable with the situation, you need to transfer care to another physician.
[Guest]: I've never I've never thought of doing that.
[Guest]: But you know, after reading this article, it really made me wonder whether I should
[Guest]: start doing that, because it goes against every belief that I believe in, it goes against
[Guest]: my training.
[Guest]: I train to become a doctor, not just to save lives, but to add some meaning to those lives
[Guest]: to add some quality to those lives.
[Guest]: And as you rightly said, you know, Atul Gawande's book talks about how, I think about 50% of
[Guest]: your of your lifetime cost on medicine or medical care happens in the last one month
[Guest]: of your life.
[Guest]: So it's that stark, that just because we have the ability to put people on ventilators to
[Guest]: start infusions and bring their blood pressure up to start dialysis and, you know, get their
[Guest]: kidneys functioning.
[Guest]: Just because we have this ability, we've started doing things which are which are possibly
[Guest]: not always in the patient's best interest.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you know, within the culture, we might romanticize things like, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: Dylan Thomas's famous words to rage, rage against the dying of the light.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas I would certainly in that situation, just like to have the grace to just go quietly
[Amit Varma]: and save everybody and myself the trouble, which, you know, brings me to euthanasia.
[Amit Varma]: Like, what do you feel about euthanasia?
[Amit Varma]: Like some countries have kind of moved towards legalizing it.
[Amit Varma]: And for those who don't know, euthanasia is where at the end of your life, you choose
[Amit Varma]: to just kind of go when you have a fatal disease or such like and and the two issues that the
[Amit Varma]: two sort of related questions that come up is that in a country like India, you know,
[Amit Varma]: where there is so much jogar and the rule of law doesn't really hold, if you were to
[Amit Varma]: legalize it, you know, it could become a pretext for people to just, you know, murder their
[Amit Varma]: older relatives and, you know, get the paperwork done to show that it's euthanasia.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, if one agrees that euthanasia is a dignified way to end life and that we
[Amit Varma]: should all have the right to end our lives, then what do we make of suicide in a general
[Amit Varma]: sense that, you know, even if you're not ill, you know, suicide, of course, is criminalized
[Amit Varma]: here, therefore becoming the one crime for which you get punished when you fail at it
[Amit Varma]: and is often correlated with the mental health issues.
[Amit Varma]: And there, of course, you know, it is something to worry about.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, a completely cold, rational person might say that I'm not ill, but I just
[Amit Varma]: don't want to go on and I have autonomy over my body.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, are these are these kind of questions that you've thought about?
[Guest]: So I have, there's actually a very interesting documentary by The Economist, so, you know,
[Guest]: Economist does these small documentaries about this Belgian girl who was 24 and chose to
[Guest]: get euthanized.
[Guest]: It's extremely disturbing, of course, to watch it as well.
[Guest]: But, you know, medically, the dilemmas are, of course, whether it's active or it's passive.
[Guest]: So active euthanasia is where a doctor plays a role in actually ending a person's life.
[Guest]: And that goes against the oath that goes against the Hippocrates oath, where we are not supposed
[Guest]: to actively help anyone die.
[Guest]: That's that's not what our skill sets are designed to do.
[Guest]: Then there's passive euthanasia, where you set it up for the patient, but the patient
[Guest]: presses the button, the patient pulls the trigger, the patient figures out or the person
[Guest]: let's not use the word patient figures out when the time is right and they want to go
[Guest]: down that road.
[Guest]: Now, the problem is that I absolutely agree with the autonomy part of things.
[Guest]: And I think it's fair.
[Guest]: I think it's better to go down that road when it's done as an advance directive and something
[Guest]: is decided not when the time comes, which may cloud your ability to make a calm, rational
[Guest]: decision, but it's done in advance.
[Guest]: So I think advance directives are very nice in terms of saying, listen, if I reach a point
[Guest]: where you have to do cardiopulmonary resuscitation on me, I don't want that being done.
[Guest]: So the no code principle, right?
[Guest]: People have bracelets which say that I don't want a code.
[Guest]: I think that's relatively straightforward in terms of ethical frameworks.
[Guest]: I think what's more challenging is what you just described, that you're not overtly suffering
[Guest]: and yet you've decided that enough is enough and you want to go at your prime rather than
[Guest]: go down a pathway where you suffer.
[Guest]: I have thought of that.
[Guest]: And I don't think there's an easy answer to that, unfortunately, because religion comes
[Guest]: into play, personal beliefs come into play, the slippery slope, where do you draw the
[Guest]: line?
[Guest]: Is there a line at which you say it's okay to do it, and what is our role as a society
[Guest]: in terms of protecting the individual from making a step that is so detrimental to them?
[Guest]: Do we have some sort of an obligation to protect that individual in terms of counseling, in
[Guest]: terms of going through a process?
[Guest]: And to the best of my knowledge, the countries that do allow euthanasia also have certain
[Guest]: measures in place where you need to go through a certain level of counseling, you need to
[Guest]: go through psychiatric evaluation, everyone needs to be convinced that it's a rational
[Guest]: decision.
[Guest]: There is a situation which is irretrievable in some way, and only then you're allowed
[Guest]: to go ahead with the decision.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, many, many fascinating ethical questions in play there.
[Amit Varma]: Before we go in for a break, a question harking back to something that you said earlier, where
[Amit Varma]: you spoke about how you'd like to see more of the humanities being taught in medicine.
[Amit Varma]: And I completely get that because there is a danger that otherwise, you know, you could
[Amit Varma]: just have a one track thing where you know how medicines interact with the body and that's
[Amit Varma]: kind of it.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, it's more important to have a more well rounded approach towards humanity.
[Amit Varma]: And also you spoke about, almost wistfully of the path, the road's not taken as it were
[Amit Varma]: right at the start, where you spoke about one could have been an author or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Was there stuff like that in your mind at any point that were you interested, like what
[Amit Varma]: kind of books did you read?
[Amit Varma]: What were you outside the context of medicine and the study of medicine?
[Amit Varma]: What were you reading?
[Amit Varma]: Did you want to be a writer?
[Amit Varma]: You know, when you read people like, say, Atul Gawande, or Abraham Verghese, or Eric
[Amit Varma]: Topol, or whatever, do you think that, hey, okay, I should also be, you know, going down
[Amit Varma]: that road?
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: So it's definitely on the bucket list.
[Guest]: And I do hope I will, I will write something someday of, of relevance and interest to to
[Guest]: some readers, at least.
[Guest]: I think a lot of my passion or my hunger for writing comes out in scientific literature
[Guest]: and publications.
[Guest]: And so that's, that's kind of an outlet in a way, the reason I could be a little prolific
[Guest]: was because I really enjoyed writing.
[Guest]: For me to construct something out of nothing is very fascinating.
[Guest]: But this this concept of, of humanities also comes from how fascinating science is, right?
[Guest]: So when I did my epidemiology, I realized that a lot of epidemiological principles actually
[Guest]: came from economics, and a lot of them came from philosophy.
[Guest]: If you look at, you know, we use something called p-value, right?
[Guest]: So a p-value basically is a measure of statistical significance, right?
[Guest]: So and when it's below a certain level, like 0.05 is a cutoff, we say that this, this is
[Guest]: something that's rare, this is something that's, that that cannot happen by chance.
[Guest]: So there is definitely a genuine association.
[Guest]: So when you look at is drug A better than drug B, if the p-value is less than 0.05,
[Guest]: you say yes, it's better.
[Guest]: And it's beyond reasonable doubt or beyond beyond chance.
[Guest]: Now, if you go back, the real argument comes from, from something Latin, which is reductio
[Guest]: ab absurdum.
[Guest]: You basically reduce the argument to a level that it's absurd that the alternative is true.
[Guest]: And then you prove the truth accordingly.
[Guest]: So that basically is coming from philosophy.
[Guest]: And I think if we were trained in some sort of philosophy, in some sort of critical thinking,
[Guest]: I think all of us would become much better doctors, because it wouldn't be that this
[Guest]: is written in stone, we would learn to question things.
[Guest]: We would learn context in a, in a lot of different ways.
[Guest]: And this whole realization that, and when I say humanities, I don't necessarily mean
[Guest]: the appreciation of art, I mean, things which actually eventually led to medicine in so
[Guest]: many different ways.
[Guest]: Abraham Verghese, to answer your second question, I think Abraham Verghese, My Own Country was
[Guest]: one of my favorite books of all time, probably, because again, you know, it was the empathy
[Guest]: that someone working at the start of the HIV pandemic in a small little town, the whole
[Guest]: people coming out of the closet at that point of time, I think it was fascinating in terms
[Guest]: of contextualizing medicine and not making it just cold, hard facts.
[Guest]: Complications, again, by Gawande was a great, great book.
[Guest]: His first book, you know, he's written some after that, which weren't as impressive, let's
[Guest]: put it that way.
[Guest]: But I thought Complications was, was fascinating.
[Guest]: I pretty much read anything.
[Guest]: I don't think I'm very selective about what I read.
[Guest]: I think The Looming Tower was the last book that I can think of recently that I really
[Guest]: liked.
[Guest]: And then there's this book called Do No Harm by a guy called Henry Marsh, who's a neurosurgeon
[Guest]: in the UK.
[Guest]: And I thought it was a fantastic book.
[Guest]: It's a book I read a couple of years ago, where he's so brutally honest about the mistakes
[Guest]: that he's made.
[Guest]: And he's so, and he can probably do it because he's relatively senior now, and you know,
[Guest]: some of the stuff that he talks about would have potentially lawsuit material.
[Guest]: But he's being so brutally honest about the uncertainties associated with medicine.
[Guest]: And I find that fascinating.
[Guest]: You know, I think, I think doctors need to be a lot more humble than they are.
[Guest]: Because there is so much uncertainty there is on a daily basis.
[Guest]: You know, I see patients in my clinic, I send them off home, there is a small proportion
[Guest]: of those patients who anything can happen the moment they leave out of my office, right.
[Guest]: And you know, that that uncertainty, I think quantifying that uncertainty and trying to
[Guest]: become a better doctor, knowing that uncertainty is out there, is is what fascinates me.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, it's a blend of philosophical, logical reasoning, it's a blend of accepting
[Guest]: that uncertainty, it's a blend of this whole principle of do no harm, right.
[Guest]: So the burden of proof is always on us to prove that things work.
[Guest]: It's never on, you know, let's try something.
[Guest]: If it doesn't work, then let's chuck it, because it's human lives that you're dealing with.
[Guest]: And I think that structure of logic and argument also comes from the humanities, which I find
[Guest]: very fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: So I had a recent episode with another person who's been a voice of reason in these COVID
[Amit Varma]: months, which is Gautam Menon.
[Amit Varma]: And Gautam also spoke about bringing different lenses to bear, like, he brings a lens of
[Amit Varma]: physics into biology and biology into physics.
[Amit Varma]: And he's also got statistical training and all these lenses help.
[Amit Varma]: So do you find yourself applying the lenses and the frames that you've got from your study
[Amit Varma]: of medicine into the world at large?
[Amit Varma]: And vice versa?
[Amit Varma]: Like do you apply other frames?
[Amit Varma]: Like one book that a lot of my guests seem to have liked and recommended on the show
[Amit Varma]: is a book called The Rules of Contagion by Adam Kuczarski.
[Amit Varma]: And there, of course, you realize that contagion is not just in the biological sense of how
[Amit Varma]: a disease spreads, but similar rules and similar trends can apply to even, you know, contagion
[Amit Varma]: when it comes to information, for example.
[Amit Varma]: So do you find yourself doing this kind of interdisciplinary sort of applying of frames
[Amit Varma]: of from one thing to another?
[Amit Varma]: And then how much do you feel that that enriches your understanding?
[Amit Varma]: No, absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, I can be pretty annoying to a lot of people sometimes because of this inherent
[Guest]: cynicism that comes from epidemiology, right?
[Guest]: So everything is in the realm of probability.
[Guest]: So there's no certainty at all.
[Guest]: Everything is like, what is the counterfactual?
[Guest]: You know, what if this didn't happen and something else had happened is what you're trying to
[Guest]: prove.
[Guest]: And since you never have a counterfactual, you try to come as close to that counterfactual
[Guest]: as you can.
[Guest]: And that spills over to everything in life.
[Guest]: So every time somebody is talking about, you know, say arranged marriage is better than
[Guest]: love marriage, for example, and you're saying, you know, what the selection biases are, individuals
[Guest]: who get into an arranged marriage is different from individuals who get into a love marriage.
[Guest]: What are the confounding variables?
[Guest]: You know, are they more wealthy and therefore have a safety net to go back to if they, you
[Guest]: know, if it fails versus in one versus the other, and you're constantly dissecting it
[Guest]: out in every aspect of your life.
[Guest]: And I think that's the fun of the generalizability of the same principles across everything around
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: There's this fascinating story, which I love telling, and you know, I'm going to use this
[Guest]: opportunity to speak about it.
[Guest]: There was this guy called Abraham Wald, and this was the Second World War.
[Guest]: This was 1943.
[Guest]: Abraham Wald was a biostatistician, was a statistician, and he was assigned to try and
[Guest]: figure out why so many planes were getting shot down and, you know, how could those planes
[Guest]: be reinforced?
[Guest]: How could they make those weak spots stronger?
[Guest]: He was given this data set where they had this whole bunch of planes and all the bullet
[Guest]: holes on the planes were mapped on it.
[Guest]: And he looked at all of them and, you know, it was clearly that the wings, the fuselage
[Guest]: and the tails, you know, these were the three areas that were hit the most.
[Guest]: And you know, as one would normally expect, the person would say, you know, reinforce
[Guest]: the wings, the tails and the fuselage, because they hit the most.
[Guest]: And what he said was just the opposite.
[Guest]: He said, everything other than the wings, the fuselage and the tails needs to be reinforced,
[Guest]: because these are the planes that came back to the base.
[Guest]: The ones that were lost out were obviously hit in the other areas, you know.
[Guest]: So that was his survivor bias.
[Guest]: The ones that survived and came back, clearly did okay, despite all the bullet holes in
[Guest]: all these areas.
[Guest]: The ones that didn't were hit in the other areas.
[Guest]: I think that's fascinating stuff and, you know, these principles apply to everything
[Guest]: in life.
[Guest]: If you just look at the data set, and you don't have the broader picture as to why that
[Guest]: data is in front of you, and what's the context in which it is, you will end up making a lot
[Guest]: of biased and flawed decisions.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's actually one of my favorite stories as well.
[Amit Varma]: And Wald, in fact, served on a committee at one point in time with Milton Friedman and
[Amit Varma]: a few other eminent people whose names I forget.
[Amit Varma]: But I think Friedman once commented something to the effect of how it felt to be in a room
[Amit Varma]: where everyone was smarter than you, which for someone like Friedman to say is pretty
[Amit Varma]: remarkable.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I think I get that feeling from the seen and the unseen as well, that
[Amit Varma]: every week, I'm basically the second smartest person in the conversation, if there is only
[Amit Varma]: one guest.
[Amit Varma]: But we'll now take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other side of the commercial break, we'll continue talking about the practice
[Amit Varma]: of medicine.
[Amit Varma]: We'll look at some of your pet areas like smoking cessation and sleep, both of which
[Amit Varma]: I want to talk a little bit more about.
[Amit Varma]: And then finally, we'll talk about COVID-19 as well, you know, where you have always kind
[Amit Varma]: of been a little bit ahead of the curve and showing the way to others.
[Amit Varma]: So all that after a quick break.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me, and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Dr. Lancelot Pinto about the practice of medicine and especially in
[Amit Varma]: the narrowed down context of COVID-19 in the last few months.
[Amit Varma]: But as we continue this fascinating discussion, Lance, I'm reminded of something you said
[Amit Varma]: just before the break, which brings me to my next question.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, you know, a quick anecdote about the President Harry Truman, who once
[Amit Varma]: when he was president said, give me a one handed economist.
[Amit Varma]: And he did not mean this in a literal way.
[Amit Varma]: But what he meant was his advisors would keep saying to him, on the one hand this on the
[Amit Varma]: other hand that and he just wanted, you know, he wanted to make decisions he wanted things
[Amit Varma]: straight up.
[Amit Varma]: Now you mentioned probabilistic thinking a few times in this episode so far, which is
[Amit Varma]: music to my ears.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I was a professional poker player for a few years.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of taught me to look at everything in the world around us in a probabilistic
[Amit Varma]: manner.
[Amit Varma]: But most people don't most people crave certainties and of course, we always ascribe certainty
[Amit Varma]: to the past, like after something has happened, it has 100% happened or 0% happened and it's
[Amit Varma]: easy to kind of look at it like that.
[Amit Varma]: But even for the future, they want a similar kind of certainty.
[Amit Varma]: So as a medical practitioner, how is it for you where you want to explain something in
[Amit Varma]: probabilistic terms, but you know that the other person in a manner of speaking wants
[Amit Varma]: a one handed doctor?
[Guest]: How do you deal with that?
[Guest]: This is a challenge I pretty much face on a daily basis, because, you know, at the end
[Guest]: of every conversation, the patient often will say but sab kuch theek hoga na or you know,
[Guest]: some broad, definite statement is made at the end.
[Guest]: And they want me to say yes, and I find it extremely difficult to do that.
[Guest]: But kuch bura toh nahi hoga but nothing bad will happen.
[Guest]: But you know, in two months, we will get better, right?
[Guest]: You know, so it's these definite absolutes that people constantly seek.
[Guest]: And it makes the whole conversation a lot quicker if I wasn't a probabilistic thinker,
[Guest]: you know, unfortunately, I am.
[Guest]: So it makes my consults longer as a consequence, but I'm trying to explain that I do hope that
[Guest]: things get better for you.
[Guest]: And I do want things to get better for you.
[Guest]: But I can't guarantee that that's going to happen, you know, and that's that's true for
[Guest]: a significant chunk of diseases, especially at a specialist level, you know.
[Guest]: So if you're if you're dealing in the community, and somebody comes to you with the sniffles,
[Guest]: for example, you can say with reasonable degree of certainty that out of 100 people I treat
[Guest]: like this 99 are going to get better.
[Guest]: So you know, I can I can afford to tell all 100 that things are going to get better and
[Guest]: be wrong once and you know, have that guy say, but, you know, listen, you said that
[Guest]: I would get better and you know, have that conversation again, the more specialized you
[Guest]: get in terms of, you know, people being referred to you after somebody has had a look at them
[Guest]: already, after someone has tried something already, it's not work, then they come to
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: It's not because the person who's tried something very often has done something wrong.
[Guest]: It's just that the nature of the illness is such that there's a lot of uncertainty around
[Guest]: certain diseases and certain conditions.
[Guest]: And I think being a communicator in such a situation is difficult, it's, it's challenging.
[Guest]: But I think at the same time, it's, it's a challenge that we need to take on in a positive
[Guest]: kind of way and in an empowering kind of way not.
[Guest]: So you empower the patient to know about what they are going through rather than look down
[Guest]: on the patient and try and say things like so I've heard this phrase.
[Guest]: So many times, right?
[Guest]: You're, you're a Google patient, you know, like you go and Google it, you know, and my
[Guest]: doctor told me, yeah, this is what you must have got from Google.
[Guest]: There are these memes floating around or these jokes floating around on WhatsApp saying Google
[Guest]: patients not wanted or something like that, right?
[Guest]: I see nothing wrong in that.
[Guest]: I see nothing wrong in a person Googling.
[Guest]: I mean, it's his or her body, you know, you're going to a doctor, the doctor is going to
[Guest]: violate that sanctity of space and, you know, give you something to put into your own body.
[Guest]: Why should you not be empowered and educated about what's, what's happening there, you
[Guest]: know?
[Guest]: So what's so wrong if I do my Google search?
[Guest]: In fact, why don't you, I mean, as a doctor, why don't you suggest a better way to Google
[Guest]: search?
[Guest]: You train the patient, say, listen, don't go to Google, fine.
[Guest]: Google may have taught you this, don't look down on your patient and say, oh yeah, this
[Guest]: is rubbish.
[Guest]: Instead say, why don't you go to this legitimate site, which has legitimate information and
[Guest]: you come to the same conclusion.
[Guest]: So to answer your question, and very often, I think people have done studies on this also
[Guest]: where they look at, you know, what the doctor says and what the patient takes away are two
[Guest]: different things sometimes.
[Guest]: So no matter how much you try to explain probabilities, the patient often goes away saying, speaking
[Guest]: in absolutes, the doctor said things will get better or the doctor says things will
[Guest]: get, things are not going to get better.
[Guest]: And sometimes, you know, if they go away with the feeling that the doctor said that there's
[Guest]: no hope, you know, if that's their interpretation of things, that's the first cue for them to
[Guest]: jump and go to another doc.
[Guest]: If they find a doctor who deals with absolutes, they're then happy, you know?
[Guest]: It is a big challenge.
[Guest]: And there's no easy solution to this, because if I have to stay honest, I have to speak
[Guest]: in terms of probabilities.
[Guest]: If I go black or white, then I'm not being honest to myself.
[Guest]: So you know, I mean, this is just who I am.
[Guest]: And hopefully, a significant proportion of patients do understand that it's coming from
[Guest]: the right and good place.
[Amit Varma]: For my listeners who must now all be intrigued and saying that, oh, you know, tell us how
[Amit Varma]: to Google.
[Amit Varma]: So why don't you give us a quick one minute or two minute clinic on how to get information,
[Amit Varma]: how to be a Google patient, so to say, like, where should they go?
[Amit Varma]: Where should they begin?
[Amit Varma]: And what should they watch out for?
[Guest]: So most websites are just like up to date is something that I alluded to earlier up
[Guest]: to date has a patient version as well.
[Guest]: So for every article that's there about a particular disease, there's a patient information
[Guest]: sheet which is also available, which is coming from a legitimate source.
[Guest]: The second thing a lot of journals nowadays do so journals have started having their social
[Guest]: media sites as well, which are quite active and a lot of that is targeted towards the
[Guest]: end user or the patient.
[Guest]: So there will be a professional summary and there will be a patient summary very often.
[Guest]: The Cochrane collaboration, right?
[Guest]: So basically, what happens in medicine is once you have a whole bunch of studies which
[Guest]: are out there on a particular subject, what people do is they synthesize this information
[Guest]: and do what we call systematic reviews.
[Guest]: So systematic reviews are currently considered the highest level of evidence because it's
[Guest]: a summary of everything that's out there.
[Guest]: And the Cochrane collaboration is one of the collaborations that consistently does systematic
[Guest]: reviews on important subjects.
[Guest]: And again, on their summary page at the bottom, there is a patient summary.
[Guest]: So if you go to the Cochrane collaboration website on a particular topic that you are
[Guest]: interested in, you will get a patient layperson summary, which is not technical, which will
[Guest]: help you.
[Guest]: You can also ask your doctor, you know, because again, most of us are part of professional
[Guest]: associations.
[Guest]: So when it comes to respiratory, there's the American Thoracic Society, there is the American
[Guest]: College of Chest Physicians, there's the British Thoracic Society.
[Guest]: All of these societies have layperson versions of most articles that are published there.
[Guest]: So I think going through legitimate societies and then trying to figure out what the layperson
[Guest]: version is, is far better than looking at an opinion or an op-ed that someone has just
[Guest]: posted out there, which may be biased.
[Amit Varma]: Great point, sir.
[Amit Varma]: Let's now talk about some of your pet themes.
[Amit Varma]: But before we do that, a quick word on your MSc, which you did in McGill University, Epidemiology.
[Amit Varma]: What kind of made you go for that?
[Amit Varma]: Because the subject, of course, is fascinating, like you said, you know, insights from many
[Amit Varma]: different fields come to bear upon that, economics, statistics, philosophy, as you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: What made you go for that?
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, what drove you towards some of your, like, what are your current,
[Amit Varma]: you know, apart from COVID-19, what are your current sort of areas into which you've gone
[Amit Varma]: into rabbit holes and become a specialist, so to say, and why?
[Guest]: So McGill again, you know, happened by chance, because of the TB study, because of the TB
[Guest]: work that we've done out here, Madhukar Pai, who's a professor at McGill, and is one of
[Guest]: the top TB guys in the world in TB diagnostics.
[Guest]: He offered me this opportunity to do a Master's in Epidemiology.
[Guest]: I got mixed feedback from people around me.
[Guest]: A lot of people told me that it was a big mistake, because I was stepping out of clinical
[Guest]: medicine for two years.
[Guest]: I was very jittery about it, because, you know, a doctor going away and, you know, going
[Guest]: back to school in a way, staying away from patients for two years, will I be employable
[Guest]: when I come back, if I decide to come back after two years, was a big challenge.
[Guest]: I think a lot of, big deal of the credit goes to Dr. Udbadia, who at that point of time
[Guest]: told me that if he were in my shoes and had an opportunity at that point of time, he would
[Guest]: accept it in the blink of an eye.
[Guest]: And in that sense, it was a leap of faith.
[Guest]: And again, the epidemiology almost didn't happen, because there were certain math requirements
[Guest]: to get into an MSc Epidemiology, which I didn't have on my transcript, and it took a lot of
[Guest]: pleading and kind of reassurances on the part of Madhupai and other people, which then made
[Guest]: them kind of waive off that requirement.
[Guest]: So that's how McGill happened.
[Guest]: And I had no concept of how important McGill was as a school.
[Guest]: I think I realized it once I went out there.
[Guest]: So one of the introductions that happen when you go to McGill is that they sell t-shirts
[Guest]: outside during orientation, which says Harvard, and below that it says America's McGill.
[Guest]: So that's the joke they have there.
[Guest]: But it's a great university in terms of respiratory medicine, a lot of good stuff has come out
[Guest]: from McGill.
[Guest]: It was where William Osler was, so it's a mecca in some ways.
[Guest]: It's where the brain was mapped by Dr. Penfield.
[Guest]: And the Department of Epidemiology was again, it was a real solid department.
[Guest]: So I was coming out of a residency, right?
[Guest]: So three years of a residency, you hardly slept, you worked like really hard.
[Guest]: So I thought this is going to be a piece of cake, you know, what is a master's, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, it's like, it's going to be child's play.
[Guest]: And it was grueling.
[Guest]: It was grueling two years where, you know, I didn't sleep much because it was assignment
[Guest]: after assignment.
[Guest]: It was stuff that I had no idea about, you know, you were going back to probability and
[Guest]: maths and Bayesian stuff, learning statistical software.
[Guest]: It was extremely challenging and you know, half of your class is really young and half
[Guest]: of the class, I was about 35 and we had a bunch of people who were like 24 who had just
[Guest]: come out of their bachelors and were directly doing it.
[Guest]: And you know, half of her class is your age.
[Guest]: So, you know, and then you have to do group assignments, which people have with people
[Guest]: 10 years younger than you.
[Guest]: And those 10 years do matter, right, when you're talking about 24 versus 35.
[Guest]: So it was a fascinating experience.
[Guest]: And again, you know, we had some great professors.
[Guest]: We had Madhu himself was a great mentor.
[Guest]: He's somebody who's a machine in terms of working, you know, you send them an email
[Guest]: at any time of the day, somehow he manages to reply and I still see that happening.
[Guest]: There was great TB work happening.
[Guest]: It was a bunch of people who worked in collaboration.
[Guest]: I mean, I truly appreciated the power of collaborative work as well.
[Guest]: So people were not necessarily competing with each other.
[Guest]: People were all complimenting each other and supporting people to grow.
[Guest]: In terms of rabbit holes, I got very passionate about medical ethics.
[Guest]: I attended a class by a guy called Jonathan Kimmelman, who was brilliant in terms of ethics.
[Guest]: My understanding of ethics completely took a 180 degree, you know, you know, all of us
[Guest]: think of ethics as being some sort of a field, which is, you know, does it feel right?
[Guest]: Does it feel wrong?
[Guest]: You know, what does it feel?
[Guest]: Does it conflict with your morals and that kind of stuff?
[Guest]: And then I realized that the thing that he kept saying over and over again in the class
[Guest]: is that this is a science.
[Guest]: This is not based on a gut feel.
[Guest]: There is a framework in which it works and, you know, something that may be wrong in one
[Guest]: framework could be right in another framework.
[Guest]: And I think that's pretty much similar to how economics works as well, right, in terms
[Guest]: of, you know, it's the framework that matters and decides what's acceptable and what's not
[Guest]: acceptable.
[Guest]: Even in terms of epidemiology, you know, this whole, we used to have this whole critiquing
[Guest]: of papers, you know, which went on for hours sometimes, everybody pointing out how things
[Guest]: could be done in a better way, how things could be done differently.
[Guest]: And I think that made a huge difference in terms of how I looked at everything after
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: So it adds a lot of uncertainty, unfortunately, to your life.
[Guest]: So I went there certain and it came back uncertain in a lot of ways.
[Guest]: So in terms of the practice of medicine, you know, from knowing all the answers, it came
[Guest]: to almost knowing nothing anymore, which in some ways is great, but in some ways makes
[Guest]: you a little cynical.
[Guest]: You know, every time there's a new study, I'm like, we'll see, you know, that's my usual
[Guest]: answer versus saying, oh, wow, there's this wonder drug, you know, this is going to change
[Guest]: everything.
[Guest]: So my levels of cynicism have increased significantly, but I genuinely believe that that was a great
[Guest]: experience.
[Amit Varma]: That is so fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, can you give me a concrete example of where this would apply in your everyday
[Amit Varma]: practice that levels of certainty having gone down and which is, of course, the way knowledge
[Amit Varma]: works, the more you know, the more you realize there is more to know.
[Amit Varma]: But in your case, in practical terms, how did it change?
[Amit Varma]: Like, obviously, you would have looked at medicine in a more probabilistic way.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that, how did it sort of change your practice as it were?
[Guest]: So let's again, I'll give you a cynical example.
[Guest]: So when Remdesivir got announced, I don't know if you remember that moment.
[Guest]: It was Fauci at the White House next to Trump.
[Guest]: And he says, you know, this is a pivotal moment in the history of COVID.
[Guest]: And it reminds me of HIV and it reminds me of how we changed everything.
[Guest]: And my first reaction was, this is the head of NIAID, right?
[Guest]: I think that's what it's called, the National Institute of Allergy and Diseases.
[Guest]: He was the guy who conducted the study.
[Guest]: And he was announcing it at the White House rather than announcing it in a publication.
[Guest]: So I was like, there's a lot of conflict of interest out there.
[Guest]: You know, you need to let the science come out, let the paper come out.
[Guest]: We'll have a look at what it says.
[Guest]: We'll have a look at whether it's a game changer or not.
[Guest]: So this inherent blind faith in individuals, institutions, I think that's been shaken a
[Guest]: lot and in a healthy way.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, I don't have anything against Fauci, obviously, and, you know, we all respect
[Guest]: him and he's been a great voice of reason throughout all of this.
[Guest]: But you know, I've learned to question everything in terms of, you know, the God being in the
[Guest]: details in a way.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and remdesivir was also, it almost seems like a drug of hope in the sense it was used
[Amit Varma]: during Ebola also, if I remember correctly, and they said it's going to be the wonder
[Amit Varma]: drug and it really didn't do anything there.
[Amit Varma]: You know, speaking of Fauci, just a quick aside, some friends and I had a session recently
[Amit Varma]: on conspiracy theories.
[Amit Varma]: And Fauci, of course, is at the center of many conspiracy theories and many people claiming
[Amit Varma]: he created the COVID virus and all that.
[Amit Varma]: These guys are bizarre.
[Amit Varma]: So we had like this fantasy situation where Fauci, Sushant Singh Rajput and Subhash Chandra
[Amit Varma]: Bose went in a UFO to blow up the World Trade Center.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, you're bringing many conspiracy theories together.
[Amit Varma]: But before moving on, you know, everything you say is so fascinating that all these sidelights
[Amit Varma]: I want to explore.
[Amit Varma]: I also want to talk a little bit about that ethics part where you said you looked at it
[Amit Varma]: completely differently in the sense that it now gave you a much more clearly defined framework
[Amit Varma]: to think about medical ethics and it wasn't just about intuition and whether something
[Amit Varma]: feels icky or not.
[Amit Varma]: But can you tell me a little bit more about that framework which you use to think through
[Amit Varma]: issues of medical ethics now?
[Guest]: It's like this whole free market versus, you know, what is governed by the government or
[Guest]: you know, government controlled healthcare, for example, this whole debate about what
[Guest]: is right and what is wrong, you know, so the private sector becomes a very easy target
[Guest]: to bash up, you know, saying that private sector is after money, private sector is after
[Guest]: incentives.
[Guest]: This is a framework that has been allowed by whoever decides what the framework is.
[Guest]: Once the framework is in place, I feel it is wrong to criticize a for-profit entity
[Guest]: for doing what they try to do to make a profit, right?
[Guest]: So it's you've defined that this is the framework, you've defined that you should allow this
[Guest]: framework to work, and then deciding what is right and wrong becomes a very blurry line
[Guest]: once you've created that sort of a framework.
[Guest]: This whole concept of, you know, if you look at what is the worth of a life or what is
[Guest]: the value of a life, right?
[Guest]: It sounds horrible to say that, you know, from a sentimental perspective, right?
[Guest]: But if you look at it in terms of how much are you ready to spend to save that one life,
[Guest]: that's how economics works in terms of healthcare.
[Guest]: Everything works in terms of metrics where they look at, you know, the cost versus the
[Guest]: benefit for every particular thing.
[Guest]: And that, again, is defined in some sort of a framework.
[Guest]: We have accepted, like I think the UK at some point of time said that one daily or one disability
[Guest]: adjusted life year was equal to 20,000 pounds or something like that.
[Guest]: So somebody came up with that framework and said that this is what we are ready to spend
[Guest]: on an individual in the country paid by taxpayer money to save one year of productive life,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So earlier, all of these things would have been nauseating in some ways, would have been
[Guest]: like, how can you ever look at health this way?
[Guest]: But that's the practicalities of the universe.
[Guest]: We work in frameworks, we work in some sort of an ethical framework that we choose to
[Guest]: decide is acceptable to us as a society.
[Guest]: And once you accept that framework, then the whole argument about right versus wrong, good
[Guest]: versus bad has to happen within that framework.
[Guest]: You can't start making arguments outside that framework and saying something is wrong.
[Guest]: So that's what the whole ethical principles made me realize.
[Guest]: This whole training in ethics, whatever little I did in ethics, made me realize that there
[Guest]: are different ways of looking at the same thing, and there is no right way.
[Guest]: This whole utilitarianism versus some other schools of thought, where it's not just the
[Guest]: utility of a particular thing that's being analyzed, but it's something else.
[Guest]: And I don't claim to understand all of it, it's clearly esoteric stuff.
[Guest]: But it just makes you realize that to call something right or wrong, or to call something
[Guest]: ethical or unethical, should not come from a gut feeling or should not come from a place
[Guest]: of emotion.
[Guest]: It needs to come from a framework in which you analyze these parameters.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And these frameworks can be complex and subjective, for example, just a thought that comes to
[Amit Varma]: mind that supposing you're in a hospital where COVID patients are rushing in and you don't
[Amit Varma]: have enough beds or where oxygen and you have to try as you have to choose who do you give
[Amit Varma]: treatment to.
[Amit Varma]: So on the one hand, you could say the old people are more vulnerable, give oxygen to
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: On the other hand, you could say that the young people have more productive years of
[Amit Varma]: life left, give oxygen to them instead.
[Amit Varma]: And then you start weighing up, you know, what is the probability of old person surviving
[Amit Varma]: or dying?
[Amit Varma]: What is the probability of young person surviving or dying?
[Amit Varma]: How do you put a value on each extra year that each person might have?
[Amit Varma]: So implicitly, you know, you are doing it now, whether you do it in an explicit way
[Amit Varma]: where you put numbers to this or not, or you do it implicitly and you go with whatever
[Amit Varma]: your moral instinct, as it were, is that no, we have to save the old or no, you know, or
[Amit Varma]: the other way around, you are making these icky decisions.
[Amit Varma]: So what sometimes we need to do is we need to sort of be explicit and try to actually
[Guest]: think this stuff out.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So take the other example of schools, right?
[Guest]: So I have twins who are six and a half years old, who've missed one year of school who
[Guest]: are very likely to miss the second year of school as well.
[Guest]: And you know, in an ethical framework in terms of, you know, what is right, what is wrong,
[Guest]: we always speak about our responsibilities towards children, right?
[Guest]: They're the vulnerable in the society.
[Guest]: So we have to speak on their behalf, we have to lobby, we have to fight on their behalf.
[Guest]: And they've not really had a voice in this pandemic, right?
[Guest]: We've just decided that despite the fact that children hardly ever get affected.
[Guest]: So it's an extremely small proportion of kids who fall sick enough to be hospitalized or
[Guest]: sick enough to have worse outcomes, extremely like it's almost negligible.
[Guest]: And yet we are subjecting them to two years of a lack of social interaction, two years
[Guest]: of meeting their friends, two years of sports, two years of everything, with the argument
[Guest]: that it's being done to protect the elderly, because they're going to go back home and
[Guest]: the elderly are vulnerable.
[Guest]: They're going to have people who have other vulnerabilities at home, and we need to protect
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: Now, this is where ethics comes into play, right?
[Guest]: I mean, this is a this is a difficult question to answer.
[Guest]: What is the worth of those two years of social interaction and education in a child's life
[Guest]: versus protecting an elderly individual?
[Guest]: And you know, there's no straight answer.
[Guest]: There's no easy answer to this.
[Guest]: But it's interesting when at least you generate a debate around these things.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And the sort of problem I've always had with utilitarianism is that utilitarianism depends
[Amit Varma]: on calculating the utility of different actions, which is impossible to do.
[Amit Varma]: Like it's incalculable.
[Amit Varma]: If a kid is losing two years of a school life, it is incalculable.
[Amit Varma]: You don't have any idea.
[Amit Varma]: By incalculable, I don't mean incredibly infinitely high.
[Amit Varma]: I just mean that you literally cannot calculate it.
[Amit Varma]: You don't know what the psychological impact will be.
[Amit Varma]: You don't know what the human capital impact will be in terms of what they might have learned
[Amit Varma]: or how they are socialized and all of those things you simply don't know.
[Amit Varma]: So if you are just going to take a utilitarian calculus, then eventually you will be putting
[Amit Varma]: subjective values out there in terms of this is how much I would value this and all that,
[Amit Varma]: which will go down to your own biases and therefore become completely unscientific.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, it's a really fascinating and muddy field.
[Amit Varma]: Let's come back to one of your pet subjects, which is sleep.
[Amit Varma]: Like you mentioned how in your practice you wouldn't sleep enough and you thought the
[Amit Varma]: masters would be easy, but you found that during the masters also you're not getting
[Amit Varma]: enough sleep.
[Amit Varma]: And that is a classic instance of a doctor not following his own advice because your
[Amit Varma]: advice to people constantly is that get enough sleep.
[Amit Varma]: Sleep is incredibly important and a subject close to my heart because I have sleep apnea,
[Amit Varma]: by the way.
[Amit Varma]: I'm on a CPAP machine and it changed the quality of my life in multiple ways, which I'll kind
[Amit Varma]: of get into.
[Amit Varma]: And I just think that this is something that everyone needs to be aware of, because especially
[Amit Varma]: when we are young, the notion of just working constantly and staying up nights and all that
[Amit Varma]: is so romanticized.
[Amit Varma]: Even in some corporate jobs, it is considered natural that you stay till late night and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And these lifestyles have an impact not just in terms of the short term impact of oh, you're
[Amit Varma]: sleepy the next day, but they have a massive long term impact on health, including possibly
[Amit Varma]: as people are finding out, raising the probability of Alzheimer's, getting Alzheimer's later
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about this, because it just seems to be such an important area
[Amit Varma]: that there is not enough public awareness about.
[Guest]: Sleep is fascinating.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at the the raw data, we spend a third of our life sleeping and that
[Guest]: would convert with an average lifespan of about 70 years.
[Guest]: You're effectively about 20 years of your life, you're asleep.
[Guest]: And yet the field of sleep medicine took off somewhere around the 70s.
[Guest]: You know, that's where a lot of research happened in the University of Chicago.
[Guest]: Sleep apnea was described for the first time.
[Guest]: And it's a fascinating field for in many different ways and a lot is being still researched.
[Guest]: So simple things like reaction time.
[Guest]: So there were experiments where they looked at, you know, Tetris as a game that, you know,
[Guest]: you gave a bunch of people, let them play Tetris.
[Guest]: Half of them fell asleep, half of them were not allowed to sleep.
[Guest]: And you make them play again.
[Guest]: And the ones who felt asleep, there was extreme consolidation of these patterns and memory
[Guest]: to an extent that they did much, much, much better the next morning versus the group that
[Guest]: didn't fall asleep.
[Guest]: So that's short term.
[Guest]: That's quick, quick results.
[Guest]: You know, things like attention span, things like memory.
[Guest]: I think there have been studies which have shown that one extra hour of sleep in school
[Guest]: going kids can reduce the incidence of attention deficit hyperactivity to a great extent.
[Guest]: Because kids, unlike adults, when they are sleep deprived, tend to get more irritable,
[Guest]: tend to get more what we call hyper as compared to adults who would just be sleepy.
[Guest]: A lot of road traffic accidents have been attributed to the lack of sleep as well or
[Guest]: to sleep related disorders.
[Guest]: These are like the low hanging fruit, right?
[Guest]: But as you rightly pointed out that people are looking at associations between sleep
[Guest]: apnea and the development of cancers in the long run, for example, because it's what happens
[Guest]: in sleep apnea as you have intermittent periods of time in the night where your oxygen levels
[Guest]: are low.
[Guest]: So your cells are deprived of oxygen and then suddenly you wake up subconsciously and then
[Guest]: your oxygen levels shoot up again.
[Guest]: So this, what we call intermittent hypoxia, that you're getting oxygen and you're not
[Guest]: getting oxygen has been postulated to play a role even in the formation of cancers.
[Guest]: So pretty much every field.
[Guest]: So again, the low hanging fruit, the initial study showed the strong link with high blood
[Guest]: pressure, strong link with stroke, possible link with heart disease as well.
[Guest]: So we've picked up the low hanging fruits and now the research is going into the subtler
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, to pick up subtler things, you need larger studies, which involve lots
[Guest]: of money and it takes a longer time to prove these things.
[Guest]: But we're realizing it more and more that sleep is crucial to health in a lot of different
[Guest]: ways.
[Guest]: And you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: We romanticize lack of sleep.
[Guest]: We almost wear it as a badge to say that I worked so hard that I barely slept last night.
[Guest]: But clearly the science suggests that it's not something to be proud of and it's something
[Guest]: that we really need to pay attention to.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I'll link to a fascinating talk on YouTube that you gave on this, which had
[Amit Varma]: a bunch of insights.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the insights I got on that was that in the US, vehicular accidents caused
[Amit Varma]: by drowsy driving exceed those caused by alcohol and drugs combined.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, it's not that you don't just need to ban drunk driving and people high
[Amit Varma]: on cocaine driving, but you also need to sleep enough.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody needs to sleep enough.
[Amit Varma]: Sleep apnea, for those who don't know, is an extremely common condition.
[Amit Varma]: What really happens is that because of a bunch of complex biological factors, which you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: in your presentation, so I won't go through that here, that your breathing keeps getting
[Amit Varma]: interrupted because of a temporary blockage in your airway because of which you keep waking
[Amit Varma]: up through the night.
[Amit Varma]: And one sign of sleep apnea, possible sleep apnea is snoring.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, 30 to 40% of people snore and only 10% have sleep apnea.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not necessary that if you snore, you have sleep apnea.
[Amit Varma]: But so I got myself tested for it and I got a CPAP machine and the sleep apnea problem
[Amit Varma]: just solved.
[Amit Varma]: But another interesting thing happened there, which I've never actually spoken to a medical
[Amit Varma]: practitioner.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't know if it's even a good thing, but it completely transformed my quality of
[Amit Varma]: life, which is that for years since childhood, I would often wake up in the morning with
[Amit Varma]: a sore throat and a blocked nose.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason I figured out much later was GERD because of acid reflux.
[Amit Varma]: And the moment I started using the CPAP machine, this just stopped.
[Amit Varma]: I presumed it was because wind rushing into my respiratory system stopped the acid reflux.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it didn't come all the way up to the nose and the throat, but it completely transformed
[Amit Varma]: my quality of life because before that, there was not a single day in my life that I hadn't
[Amit Varma]: woken up with a sore throat or a blocked nose, which I initially used to assume was I didn't
[Amit Varma]: associate it with GERD.
[Amit Varma]: I thought it's a random respiratory thing.
[Amit Varma]: When I was a kid, my mother even took me to a homeopath in Pune, which is kind of funny.
[Amit Varma]: So and I'm thinking that at one level, it's a good thing that treatment for something
[Amit Varma]: else has happened to have this impact here.
[Amit Varma]: But at the other level, it's a bad thing because what it is treating is a symptom.
[Amit Varma]: And the underlying causes of GERD, which I might need to do something about whether it's
[Amit Varma]: losing weight or whatever, is stuff that I'm not handling.
[Amit Varma]: So do you sometimes see this in your practice that you're treating something, but something
[Amit Varma]: else gets sorted or something counterintuitive like this happens, like in this particular
[Amit Varma]: case, what would your reaction be?
[Guest]: There are a lot of associations with sleep apnea.
[Guest]: Before I get into that, just to add to something you said earlier, so there was a study which
[Guest]: looked at blood alcohol levels and sleep deprivation, and they actually did it in medical students
[Guest]: and found that medical students post-call who were sleep deprived, in terms of their
[Guest]: cognitive performance performed very similar to people who had a reasonable amount of alcohol
[Guest]: in their system.
[Guest]: So that's how bad sleep deprivation is.
[Guest]: So there may be a lot of teetotallers out there who work really hard and feel that they're
[Guest]: not drinking, but they're probably causing an equal amount of damage by depriving themselves
[Guest]: of sleep.
[Guest]: So to get back to your question in terms of whether sleep apnea is connected to a lot
[Guest]: of things, there are lots of fascinating things that happen.
[Guest]: So sleep apnea basically is obstruction of the windpipe at the level of the throat, right?
[Guest]: So it's generally fat at the base of the tongue, at the back of the tongue, which causes an
[Guest]: obstruction out there.
[Guest]: So what happens essentially is when you breathe in sleep apnea, so your windpipe is shut,
[Guest]: and you're breathing against the resistance of a shut windpipe.
[Guest]: So imagine, if you think about that experiment where you have a diaphragm below a bottle
[Guest]: and you pull the diaphragm down and the balloons fill up inside, I don't know if you've, we've
[Guest]: done this in school, this is like you're shutting that and you're pulling the diaphragm down,
[Guest]: but you've shut down the way for the air to enter.
[Guest]: So that puts a lot of negative pressure inside the chest.
[Guest]: Now this negative pressure inside the chest surprisingly causes the heart muscle to stretch.
[Guest]: When the heart muscle stretches, it releases a substance called atrial natriuretic peptide,
[Guest]: which causes you to basically pee.
[Guest]: So it's very interesting that people with sleep apnea very often will pee three or four
[Guest]: times every night in the severe form, or at least once or twice every night.
[Guest]: And the moment they start using the CPAP machine, that completely stops.
[Guest]: So something that you wouldn't even think is related, right?
[Guest]: You would think, why is my peeing frequency gone down when all you've done is push air
[Guest]: down my throat?
[Guest]: But that's how fascinating the human body is.
[Guest]: There are so many things which are interconnected.
[Guest]: So GERD is a very common comorbidity with sleep apnea, because again, you know, obesity,
[Guest]: GERD and sleep apnea, you know, kind of form a triangle.
[Guest]: And the treatment of sleep apnea, it very often gets rid of a lot of these corollary
[Guest]: symptoms, which you otherwise would not have thought directly associated with the disease.
[Guest]: Blood pressure tends to come down by a few points, you know, heart rates tend to get
[Guest]: better post-sleep apnea, you know, something that's not spoken about.
[Guest]: Erectile dysfunction is sometimes very common in individuals who have sleep apnea as well.
[Guest]: And that gets to know, and we have a lot of urology reference to us.
[Guest]: So urologists who are up to date with the literature and sensitized enough to this connection
[Guest]: have sent me patients of erectile dysfunction coming to a person getting their sleep apnea
[Guest]: treated and then, you know, their erectile dysfunction getting better as well.
[Guest]: So it's fascinating how things are related sometimes, you know, and it may not be very
[Guest]: obvious in terms of physiology that it's air going down the respiratory system.
[Guest]: So all its effects have to be related to the respiratory system.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, it is completely fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: So the fact that there are people out there with erectile problems, which are caused by
[Guest]: a throat muscle.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Doing something that they should is insanely fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't actually imply that my sleep apnea and GERD were necessarily linked.
[Amit Varma]: I think I've always had the GERD, but this just turned out to be the CPAP machine just
[Amit Varma]: turned out to be a jogar solution in whatever way it works for that.
[Amit Varma]: And that got me to thinking about jogar solutions, because one of the other like interesting
[Amit Varma]: things that I learned that you sometimes recommend is that you recommend that your patients with
[Amit Varma]: sleep apnea that they sleep on the side, because then they are less likely to feel the effects
[Amit Varma]: of it and to make sure that they do that, you sometimes ask them to sleep with tennis
[Amit Varma]: balls sewn onto the back of their shirt.
[Amit Varma]: So they can't possibly sleep on their back, even if they want to.
[Amit Varma]: So as a doctor, do you find yourself thinking creatively for these kind of jogar solutions
[Amit Varma]: that come from commonsensical thinking or do you kind of do this a lot or and how do
[Amit Varma]: patients react to it?
[Guest]: So the next level of jogar, by the way, for the same solution is to wear a bra in the
[Guest]: opposite direction and stuff it with tennis balls, right?
[Guest]: But you don't want to open the door to the pizza delivery guy, of course, when that happens.
[Guest]: But that's a jogar again, you know, I mean, that's an easier jogar rather than sewing
[Guest]: sometimes, but you know, people obviously, you know, stare at you when you say things
[Guest]: like that, wondering if something's wrong with you.
[Guest]: But trust me, I mean, it does work very well, because sleep apnea is clearly worse when
[Guest]: you're on your back versus when you're on your belly or on your sides.
[Guest]: That's the same solution indirectly, we're trying to apply for COVID as well, right?
[Guest]: Making people sleep prone, because the airway opens up, the lung opens up a bit, and it
[Guest]: improves oxygenation.
[Guest]: A lot of medical grade equipment often is very expensive.
[Guest]: And you know, all of us do try to work with some sorts of solutions, sometimes to help
[Guest]: people deal with their lack of ability to sometimes purchase that kind of medical equipment,
[Guest]: but to do it in a way that that gives them the same relief.
[Guest]: And you know, I think there's a lot of innovation happening in these kinds of spaces, as well,
[Guest]: which suggests that it doesn't have to be that expensive.
[Guest]: You know, sometimes things which are not expensive also work well.
[Guest]: For example, in asthma, we use inhalers, right?
[Guest]: So inhalers, the traditional inhalers, which you press, and you take a breath, have to
[Guest]: be coordinated perfectly.
[Guest]: So the second you press the inhaler, if you don't breathe, you end up getting a mouth
[Guest]: spray, nothing goes into the chest, right?
[Guest]: So the solution to that is something called a spacer.
[Guest]: It's like this round plastic transparent box at the end of which you attach the inhaler,
[Guest]: you press it, so the drug is locked into the spacer, and then you breathe at your own convenience.
[Guest]: Now the jugaad for this, which I've seen people do is use a PET bottle, you cut the end of
[Guest]: the PET bottle, so you stick the inhaler to that end, you keep the mouth of the bottle
[Guest]: in your mouth, you press the inhaler, and you breathe through it.
[Guest]: And again, it takes away the problem of coordination.
[Guest]: It's a total jugaad in that sense.
[Guest]: And from what little I know, it seems to work really well, as opposed to a spacer, which
[Guest]: is a more expensive device.
[Amit Varma]: That sounds really fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go on to, you know, one of the other subjects in which you've been active, which
[Amit Varma]: is you've spoken of your smoking cessation therapy.
[Amit Varma]: And recently, in fact, you tweeted, quote, most individuals who consume tobacco know
[Amit Varma]: it is harmful, but continue to do so because of the highly addictive nature of nicotine.
[Amit Varma]: What we need to do is not offer such individuals a sermon, but a science based way to overcome
[Amit Varma]: the addiction.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, part of the reason that you're into that you care about smoking is you're
[Amit Varma]: into all these pulmonary diseases of the lungs, which are caused by smoking.
[Amit Varma]: So it is a big deal.
[Amit Varma]: You don't just want to treat symptoms, you want to get to the root cause, make people
[Amit Varma]: stop smoking.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about this, like, what are the approaches that you make?
[Amit Varma]: Because most of the approaches towards to make people stop smoking is sort of to guilt
[Amit Varma]: them into stopping.
[Amit Varma]: What do you guys do?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I'm just going to throw some statistics.
[Guest]: So there was a study called the Global Adult Tobacco Survey, it's called the GATS survey.
[Guest]: And it was done in India, it was found that more than 90% of individuals, even in rural
[Guest]: India, even with literacy levels being questionable, more than 90% of individuals knew that tobacco
[Guest]: was bad for them.
[Guest]: You know, in the survey, around 50% of individuals admitted to having tried to quit in the year
[Guest]: prior, in the previous year.
[Guest]: This clearly suggests that there is not a knowledge problem.
[Guest]: So whenever you want to change behavior, there are three things that are generally needed
[Guest]: for changing behavior.
[Guest]: From what again, what I understand of behavioral sciences, you need the knowledge, or you need
[Guest]: the motivation and you need the confidence, right?
[Guest]: The problem is, as doctors, when we see patients sitting in front of us who admit to smoking,
[Guest]: we think it's a knowledge problem for some reason.
[Guest]: And we give them a sermon about, you know, listen, this is bad, this can affect you in
[Guest]: this way, it can affect you in that way, when the data clearly suggests that they already
[Guest]: know that.
[Guest]: So you're working on the wrong part of the problem.
[Guest]: The second is the motivation and third is the confidence.
[Guest]: And if you speak to people who smoke, their confidence levels are abysmally low, because
[Guest]: they've tried many times in the past and they've failed.
[Guest]: You know, most individuals will not even admit to trying, they will not even admit to their
[Guest]: own spouses and their own loved ones that they are trying.
[Guest]: They will do it quietly because their confidence levels are so low that they already know it's
[Guest]: not going to work when they start, right?
[Guest]: Now the reason for that is that nicotine is a highly addictive substance.
[Guest]: Nicotine addiction is an addiction.
[Guest]: It's not a habit.
[Guest]: It's not.
[Guest]: So we use these words like habit, lifestyle choice, we use all sorts of words to make
[Guest]: the burden of guilt, like you said, you know, to make the person feel guilty, to make the
[Guest]: person feel responsible for where they're at, where the science clearly shows you that
[Guest]: it's an addiction and should be treated like any other addiction.
[Guest]: So when you see a person who is in front of you, and I run a tobacco cessation clinic,
[Guest]: so they come to me reasonably motivated already, which is great, you know.
[Guest]: So I don't have to work on that motivation.
[Guest]: Now that may be a different story altogether, how you work on that motivation, but once
[Guest]: they are motivated enough, they do not need that lecture or that sermon or that guilt
[Guest]: trip or that, you know, the guilting.
[Guest]: What they need is a solution and the solutions are science-based.
[Guest]: So all over the world, the standard therapy for smoking cessation has been defined.
[Guest]: There are drugs which are designed to work on centers of the brain to give you the same
[Guest]: pleasurable experience that a cigarette gives you whilst at the same time not giving you
[Guest]: the thousand other things that a cigarette gives you.
[Guest]: And most of these therapies have been used for about three to six months.
[Guest]: So it's a defined fixed therapy for three to six months, which a person adheres to according
[Guest]: to a certain plan.
[Guest]: That plan ensures that they don't get irritable, they don't feel cravings, they don't feel
[Guest]: terrible.
[Guest]: So the bottom line of a smoking cessation clinic is that you are able to quit comfortably.
[Guest]: Anybody can quit, right?
[Guest]: But that quitting is so uncomfortable usually that people get back thinking that it's easier
[Guest]: to continue rather than going down that path.
[Guest]: And if you look at the statistics there of a hundred people who decide to quit within
[Guest]: a month, 97 have started smoking again, only three succeed.
[Guest]: And if I had to guess, those three would be individuals who are doing it after say a bypass
[Guest]: surgery, after a major life event, after getting diagnosed with something that really shakes
[Guest]: them up.
[Guest]: And that's not where we want people to be.
[Guest]: We want people to be able to do it comfortably and there's a science to it.
[Guest]: Now, again, it's unfortunate that we have specialized clinics and I have to do it like
[Guest]: I have some secret mantra to it, whereas all over the world, it's general practitioners,
[Guest]: it's being done as part of routine healthcare.
[Guest]: There is no great skill to this.
[Guest]: And what I've been trying really hard in terms of training sessions, we've been working with
[Guest]: people as well, is to de-specialize this.
[Guest]: This is something that your general practitioner should be able to offer you without any judgment,
[Guest]: without any gyan, you smoke and you want to give up smoking.
[Guest]: This is what you need to do.
[Guest]: And it should be as straightforward as that.
[Guest]: And this is again, you know, this is something that's been done all over the world.
[Guest]: This is not something special.
[Amit Varma]: And what do these medicines do?
[Amit Varma]: Like, do they tackle the dopamine receptors of the brain or something or how do they kind
[Guest]: of work?
[Guest]: So the most fascinating molecule in this group, which has shown the maximum amount of success
[Guest]: is a drug called varinicline.
[Guest]: So basically what happens is when you smoke a cigarette or you consume tobacco in any
[Guest]: form, the nicotine goes and binds to a receptor in the brain, which eventually leads to the
[Guest]: release of dopamine.
[Guest]: Now dopamine is a pleasure chemical, you know, and it's not only is it a pleasure chemical,
[Guest]: it comes out in response to some very primal needs.
[Guest]: So hunger, thirst, sex, these are the times when dopamine gets released in the brain.
[Guest]: So it has a very strong pleasurable element as well as a very strong primal evolutionary
[Guest]: role in human beings.
[Guest]: Varinicline binds to these receptors and causes that dopamine surge.
[Guest]: So when an individual smokes, he gets that surge of dopamine, which keeps him stimulated
[Guest]: in some ways, which feeds into that pleasure activity.
[Guest]: Now varinicline goes and binds to the receptor called the acetylcholine receptor, which eventually
[Guest]: causes the release of dopamine.
[Guest]: So it gives you that kick, which you would normally get, and it gives it to you in a
[Guest]: sustained way.
[Guest]: So a person who smokes or consumes tobacco really craves it when the nicotine levels
[Guest]: hit a nadir, hit a really low level.
[Guest]: By virtue of this drug constantly stimulating that center, you do not reach those low levels
[Guest]: and therefore the cravings don't generally occur.
[Guest]: What's fascinating is also that if while you're on the drug, you decide to smoke, the nicotine
[Guest]: in your cigarette smoke does not have any receptor to bind to because the receptor has
[Guest]: been blocked by the drug.
[Guest]: So you don't experience the pleasure that you would normally get.
[Guest]: So I've had a lot of patients come back to me and say, I did smoke, but you know, I stopped
[Guest]: at half a cigarette and I just threw it away because it wasn't doing it for me.
[Guest]: So this is what we call a partial agonist antagonist, you know, so it not only stimulates,
[Guest]: but it also blocks the receptor.
[Guest]: I think the physiology again is fascinating.
[Guest]: This is one of the drugs that we use.
[Guest]: You can also use combination nicotine replacement therapy.
[Guest]: So a patch, which generally tends to work for 24 hours in the background, again, preventing
[Guest]: those low levels of nicotine combined with either a gum or a lozenge or an inhaler to
[Guest]: be used as and when you have cravings.
[Guest]: So that's another strategy we employ.
[Guest]: And sometimes we use a combination of both strategies.
[Guest]: But again, this is not based on a gut feeling.
[Guest]: So there are certain predictors of addiction, you know, so supposing you've started smoking
[Guest]: in your teens, supposing you smoke within the first five minutes of waking up.
[Guest]: If you smoke more than 10 to 15 cigarettes a day, you are likely to be more addicted
[Guest]: and you very often need a combination of drugs in that situation.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this is incredibly fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, it's a smoking specific solution because the molecule would bind to the receptor
[Amit Varma]: that nicotine binds to.
[Amit Varma]: And so, you know, it wouldn't be useful for other kinds of addiction.
[Amit Varma]: There's an amusing story I have.
[Amit Varma]: It's not amusing.
[Amit Varma]: It's kind of sad about how I tried to wean a friend of gambling addiction because the
[Amit Varma]: mechanisms are the same, right?
[Amit Varma]: Pushing chips forward, dopamine rush in your head and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So there's this guy who was a banker who lived in Worli and the location is relevant.
[Amit Varma]: So he was a banker.
[Amit Varma]: He lived in Worli.
[Amit Varma]: He used to play these underground cash games with me back in the day.
[Amit Varma]: And it was clearly he was just addicted.
[Amit Varma]: He wasn't using his brain.
[Amit Varma]: He was just losing big.
[Amit Varma]: And I liked him a lot.
[Amit Varma]: A very sweet guy.
[Amit Varma]: And I could realize that bit by bit he's blowing his savings up.
[Amit Varma]: His wife is pissed off.
[Amit Varma]: So I called him home one day and I live in Andheri and this is also relevant.
[Amit Varma]: And at the time I called him, you know, he was playing at this video game parlor in Bandra.
[Amit Varma]: So even when, you know, there were no live games, he would go to this video game parlor
[Amit Varma]: and play video poker there.
[Amit Varma]: So anyway, so he came home and we chatted about it.
[Amit Varma]: And as you said, the knowledge wasn't a problem.
[Amit Varma]: He understood it was an addiction.
[Amit Varma]: And I went took him through the biochemistry and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I said, we have to figure out some drastic ways of stopping it.
[Amit Varma]: This is what I recommend that you call your wife right now.
[Amit Varma]: And you tell her that you are giving her the credit card and all access to the bank and
[Amit Varma]: everything.
[Amit Varma]: And you're just stopping all your access to money.
[Amit Varma]: She has to give you pocket money every day for whatever taxi or Uber you take.
[Amit Varma]: And that is it.
[Amit Varma]: You have no other access to your money.
[Amit Varma]: And he agreed.
[Amit Varma]: He called his wife.
[Amit Varma]: She was delighted at the suggestion.
[Amit Varma]: And I think she also told him, I'll make chicken for you today, come for dinner.
[Amit Varma]: So he was very excited.
[Amit Varma]: He said, Amit, you know, you might just have saved my family life and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And then he leaves home.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem is this, and this is why the locations are important, that to get from
[Amit Varma]: Andheri to Worli, you have to cross Bandra.
[Amit Varma]: And three hours later, another friend calls me and he says that, bro, your friend is sitting
[Amit Varma]: at this video parlor playing for the last two hours.
[Amit Varma]: So that didn't kind of work out well.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess, you know, is there any kind of pharmacology for general addiction?
[Amit Varma]: Because so many people are also addicted to social media, you know, or even something
[Amit Varma]: like Tetris or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, but I guess there's nothing you can do for that in terms of medicine yet,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: In the domain of psychology, I know that cognitive behavior therapy is being tried in a lot of
[Guest]: addictions.
[Guest]: Hypnotherapy claims to have some success.
[Guest]: But you know, again, these things are not very consistent.
[Guest]: So you're not really sure in terms of the literature.
[Guest]: That's one of the problems of sciences that are not pharmacotherapy-based, right?
[Guest]: So the drug, the dosage, mode of delivery, when a clinical trial is conducted, all these
[Guest]: are very clearly defined.
[Guest]: So therefore, all over the world, anyone can try to replicate that.
[Guest]: The problem with behavioral sciences sometimes is that it's the person whose expertise it
[Guest]: is, it's the way they deliver it, and to translate that sometimes is a little challenging.
[Amit Varma]: So let's talk about COVID-19 now, because COVID-19 is clearly an incredibly difficult
[Amit Varma]: problem for a doctor to deal with.
[Amit Varma]: Because you're having every day to make decisions on matters that involve life and death.
[Amit Varma]: And in terms of information, you're in the fog of war, you don't know what the hell is
[Amit Varma]: going on.
[Amit Varma]: You know, someone like you would be looking at the latest research trying to figure out
[Amit Varma]: what is a virus?
[Amit Varma]: What does it do?
[Amit Varma]: But even there, how does one treat COVID?
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about your experience over these last few months, right?
[Amit Varma]: How did your thinking on this evolve?
[Amit Varma]: What were the dilemmas you faced?
[Amit Varma]: Just what was it like for you guys?
[Guest]: I think the worst part was clearly the first two, three months, right?
[Guest]: Because there was complete uncertainty, we had no idea what was going to work.
[Guest]: We started using steroids about a month or two before the recovery trial got published.
[Guest]: And we used it in these prolonged fevers that were happening in the second week, sometimes
[Guest]: with the oxygen levels were dropping.
[Guest]: We used it purely based on a gut feeling at that point of time, and a little bit of literature
[Guest]: that was coming up from small reports from China saying that, you know, methylprednisolone
[Guest]: was used in a couple of studies.
[Guest]: And we saw positive results and that reinforced, I believe, in the appropriate use of steroids
[Guest]: at that point.
[Guest]: But again, you know, I mean, it was one center doing something by themselves based on what
[Guest]: you could call trial and error to a certain extent.
[Guest]: As time passed by, and the literature started accumulating, and that's, you know, you have
[Guest]: to give immense amount of credit to people who got drug trials and these adaptive trials
[Guest]: up and running within a few months, you know.
[Guest]: Being a researcher myself, I know how extremely difficult it is to do simple, small little
[Guest]: studies.
[Guest]: And these guys, you know, like the solidarity, like recovery, they did trials on a nationwide
[Guest]: scale with multiple centers, got everybody on board, got randomization to occur, protocols,
[Guest]: you know, submitted to ethics committees.
[Guest]: To do all of that in the time span that they did it is nothing short of a miracle, you
[Guest]: know, and that needs to be lauded, which also possibly reflects how prepared they were for
[Guest]: something like this.
[Guest]: The systems were in place to roll out a study if need be.
[Guest]: Possibly they had thought about this in advance, may not be in the context of a pandemic, but
[Guest]: in the context of any study for that matter, that if they wanted to roll out a study within
[Guest]: two months, they could do it and do it really well of a high caliber.
[Guest]: As the results of these studies started coming in, it became a lot easier in terms of what
[Guest]: we definitely know and what we definitely do not know.
[Guest]: So there's still uncertainty.
[Guest]: For example, you know, the use of blood thinners is still an uncertain area.
[Guest]: Couple of studies published just in the last week, one showed that aspirin possibly doesn't
[Guest]: work.
[Guest]: One shows that when you use blood thinners in a treatment dose, which we call a therapeutic
[Guest]: dose, a high dose doesn't work.
[Guest]: But this is still evolving.
[Guest]: So, you know, there is still uncertainty, but as and when the large trials showed us
[Guest]: that things definitely don't work, I think gradually things started becoming clearer.
[Guest]: This is one of the places where being, you know, an epidemiologist kind of possibly helped
[Guest]: me because the cynicism was the default.
[Guest]: The default was never, you know, let's try this new thing.
[Guest]: Let's try something else.
[Guest]: The other thing that was constantly reassuring was that the number of individuals who got
[Guest]: hospitalized, the number of individuals who got severe enough was still a small fraction
[Guest]: of the total number of cases.
[Guest]: When that first zero prevalence study came out, for example, it said 57% of people in
[Guest]: slums had already been infected.
[Guest]: And if you extrapolated to that, you realize that the fraction of individuals who got admitted
[Guest]: was a really tiny fraction.
[Guest]: It wasn't really big if so many people had antibodies already.
[Guest]: So there were two reassuring things, therefore, right?
[Guest]: One was that this was a disease which spared the majority, which did not cause a majority
[Guest]: to die.
[Guest]: Had it been a disease which did cause a majority to die, we would have been in big trouble
[Guest]: because then we would have to constantly make very difficult choices.
[Guest]: The reason we could go to what is called masterful inactivity or watching, you know, closely
[Guest]: observing, monitoring is because we knew at the back of our minds that a majority of individuals
[Guest]: are going to do very well without any intervention.
[Guest]: That was one thing that was very useful from a treatment perspective.
[Guest]: The second thing that was very useful was the data that kept coming in and telling us
[Guest]: what didn't work.
[Guest]: So you know, when plasma got thrown out and, you know, we realized it didn't work.
[Guest]: In drugs like remdesivir, there was more accumulating evidence to suggest that it didn't work.
[Guest]: Lopinavir, ritonavir, there were a lot of hydroxychloroquine, all these drugs, you know,
[Guest]: reasonably quickly, there was information out there to tell us that we shouldn't be
[Guest]: using it.
[Guest]: So I think the combination of low severity disease in that sense, as an absolute fraction,
[Guest]: combined with the rapidity with which evidence was synthesized, I think really helped us
[Guest]: gain confidence as the pandemic went on.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the things that we sometimes talk about in public policy is this flawed
[Amit Varma]: mindset of, we must do something, this is something, therefore, let's do it.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess to some extent, that is a pressure which would have hit doctors during this period,
[Amit Varma]: because you would have been under pressure to medicate, to give some medicine or the
[Amit Varma]: other.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, even if you are skeptical of say last year, one would have been skeptical
[Amit Varma]: of hydroxychloroquine and this year, you know, during the second wave, we've had ivermectin,
[Amit Varma]: remdesivir, plasma, all lauded as sort of therapies, I guess, one, there would be pressure
[Amit Varma]: on doctors to prescribe them, because relatives would be saying, you know, that doctor prescribed
[Amit Varma]: this for my uncle, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: How does one deal with that?
[Amit Varma]: Because one of the things that I noted was that there was this panic on social media
[Amit Varma]: with these hundreds of messages every day, or hundreds that I saw every day about ivermectin
[Amit Varma]: needed, remdesivir needed, plasma needed, well, we know they don't work.
[Amit Varma]: And the problem is that frantic relatives going out to get them are actually catching
[Amit Varma]: COVID, standing in line somewhere and trying to get the damn medicine, therefore compounding
[Amit Varma]: tragedy on tragedy, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: So as a doctor, how did you deal with that?
[Amit Varma]: Did you face that kind of pressure from your patients, ki, arey lekin remdesivir nahi diya?
[Guest]: It was it was an extremely difficult period.
[Guest]: And to a certain extent, it still is.
[Guest]: It's just that when you when you gain a voice that is that has a little more credibility
[Guest]: and respect with time, people tend to trust you a little more.
[Guest]: But you know, it was extremely difficult at the start to tell people that observation
[Guest]: to to say that monitoring and you know, to constantly handhold them and say that we are
[Guest]: monitoring you.
[Guest]: We are not saying don't do anything and just, you know, leave it to God.
[Guest]: We're not saying that we're saying that we are monitoring you.
[Guest]: Steroids came on very early as lifesaving drugs.
[Guest]: So we said that we knew that if you do deteriorate, we have something that might work.
[Guest]: Tocilizumab, at some point of time, there was evidence to suggest that it works.
[Guest]: So we did have drugs for when people deteriorated.
[Guest]: But to tell people to just stay put was extremely challenging and not just challenging.
[Guest]: It was it was challenging.
[Guest]: It was time consuming.
[Guest]: It was fatiguing as a doctor to have the same conversation over and over and over again.
[Guest]: And it would give me nightmares at some point of time, you know, because I am the guy who
[Guest]: is telling somebody that you don't do anything, knowing fully well that there is a fraction
[Guest]: of the don't do anything is going to deteriorate.
[Guest]: The unfortunate part is that I have no control over that deterioration.
[Guest]: I don't have a drug that can prevent that deterioration.
[Guest]: I don't have the drug that can make the person better today.
[Guest]: So that deterioration doesn't happen.
[Guest]: So I am telling a person that I offer you nothing today, knowing fully well that, you
[Guest]: know, a small fraction of these individuals who got nothing would deteriorate.
[Guest]: And then in hindsight would clearly blame me as being the person responsible for their
[Guest]: deterioration, not understanding that that deterioration, unfortunately, would have happened
[Guest]: no matter what, you know.
[Guest]: So that was very scary to sleep at night, knowing that there was a cohort of patients
[Guest]: out there who you were handholding, not giving anything.
[Guest]: And knowing that, you know, when you wake up in the morning, there would be a WhatsApp
[Guest]: message once in a way saying that, you know, this person's oxygen levels fell the previous
[Guest]: night, got admitted.
[Guest]: And you hope, you know, you hope that their faith in you was strong enough that they realize
[Guest]: that you did nothing wrong, you know, you were following the science.
[Guest]: And you know, fortunately, I think a lot of my patients got it, but it takes a lot of
[Guest]: time in terms of counseling and handholding as well.
[Guest]: That's what I resent to a small extent that, you know, I was the one having to explain
[Guest]: why I was doing the scientific thing, while the guy next door who was prescribing 10 drugs
[Guest]: had no explaining to do.
[Guest]: He said, oh, you come in, you got COVID, take these 10 drugs, go, patient happy, doctor
[Guest]: happy, you know, life moves on.
[Guest]: Nine out of 10 of his patients also got better because that's the nature of the illness.
[Guest]: One out of 10 who didn't get better would probably say, you know, but my poor doctor
[Guest]: tried everything and still I didn't get better, while I was unfortunately the bad guy.
[Guest]: And you know, that was one thing that I didn't really like in terms of having to explain
[Guest]: being scientific.
[Guest]: I don't think that's how medicine works, you know.
[Guest]: The burden of proof should be on the drug.
[Guest]: The drug has to prove its worth.
[Guest]: I don't have to prove the fact that my scientific choices of not giving you a drug because there
[Guest]: is no drug that works need to be justified on an ongoing basis.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I can totally see why any doctor would be incentivized to give that cocktail
[Amit Varma]: of drugs just to avoid the blame because that is what the patients expect.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of tragic.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a quick digression before we come back to COVID.
[Amit Varma]: How does one deal psychologically with patients taking a turn for the worse and dying over
[Amit Varma]: the years, over so much medical practice, especially for a doctor, like you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, where you've been trained to when you try to look at each patient as not a collection
[Amit Varma]: of statistics of age, weight, whatever, but also as a human being, you know, their names,
[Amit Varma]: you kind of you're chatting with them about their lives.
[Amit Varma]: And then at some point they go and some of the time you can't do anything about it.
[Amit Varma]: Some of the time you can in hindsight know that had I done something different, it would
[Amit Varma]: have worked out differently.
[Amit Varma]: So how did you deal with that kind of a process?
[Amit Varma]: Is it still hard after all these years or, you know, does one kind of build a system
[Amit Varma]: of mental defense where, you know, you can just get on with things?
[Guest]: I mean, the probabilistic thinking and the uncertainty kind of is what you use to soothe
[Guest]: your conscience when it does happen, because, you know, at the end of the day, you have
[Guest]: to soothe your conscience in some way, otherwise, you know, you are not going to make peace
[Guest]: and you're not going to be, and if it shatters your confidence completely, you're not going
[Guest]: to be able to offer the best to the next patient, you know.
[Guest]: So I think the probabilistic thinking probably helps in some ways in that situation, because
[Guest]: I've seen doctors swing from one direction to the other also.
[Guest]: You have one person who beats the odds and something really bad happens, and then you
[Guest]: become extremely defensive after that.
[Guest]: Sometimes it's because of litigation, sometimes it's just because of a conscience which can't
[Guest]: make peace with the fact that something like that happened.
[Guest]: And if it serves to grow, great, you know, which is what it's all about, you know.
[Guest]: On a daily basis, all of us are growing.
[Guest]: I would be stupid to say that, you know, I've done everything right.
[Guest]: All of us have made judgment errors, all of us have, you know, sometimes relied on our
[Guest]: instinct when our instincts have failed us.
[Guest]: And as long as we learn from them in a way that's not usually detrimental, you know.
[Guest]: So let me give you an example, when we give drugs for tuberculosis, if you give it in
[Guest]: a young individual, three out of a thousand individuals, the drugs will affect the liver.
[Guest]: Now if that makes me start doing liver function tests on all the thousand to prevent that,
[Guest]: to pick up those three early, firstly, there's no reason to believe that I would be able
[Guest]: to pick them up early, you know, because symptoms manifest when the liver doesn't work properly,
[Guest]: and maybe the symptoms come before you can pick it up early.
[Guest]: But if I, you know, have one patient out of a thousand get a bad liver, get a bad episode
[Guest]: of hepatitis, get admitted, for example, and it completely shakes up my belief system,
[Guest]: and then I start doing liver function tests on every single patient who comes, I don't
[Guest]: think that's fair as well.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, it's okay to feel that something bad should not have happened.
[Guest]: But you also know that that was within the probability that's being described the world
[Guest]: over.
[Guest]: You need to accept that that's what happened.
[Guest]: Maybe your education skills need to get better.
[Guest]: Maybe the patient came in too late.
[Guest]: Maybe the patient could have come a day before when they started noticing symptoms rather
[Guest]: than wait.
[Guest]: So it's great to audit what went wrong.
[Guest]: It's great to look back and try and figure out what went wrong, and how can we improve
[Guest]: on things.
[Guest]: But that balance of not, therefore, you know, doing a U-turn and completely going the other
[Guest]: way in terms of being overly being gung-ho about investigations, being very, very defensive.
[Guest]: I think that's a challenging balance.
[Guest]: That being said, I mean, it always shatters you when you lose someone unexpectedly.
[Guest]: And that's the uncertainty that medicine is all about.
[Guest]: You know, there are some individuals who you will lose on your watch with zero expectations
[Guest]: of you losing them.
[Guest]: Those tend to be rare events, but when they do happen, you have no clue in terms of, you
[Guest]: know, was that going to happen anyways?
[Guest]: Did it happen because of something that I did?
[Guest]: Could I have done something better?
[Guest]: Was I not serious enough in terms of, you know, investigating a little more, pushing
[Guest]: a little harder?
[Guest]: Did the message not come out clearly?
[Guest]: And that introspection is unfortunately part of the deal, you know.
[Guest]: And, you know, fortunately, shockers of events which completely fall outside the probability
[Guest]: of what you think are rare, you know, fortunately, they are rare.
[Guest]: But when they do happen, and you know, that's the busier you get, the larger your base of
[Guest]: patients, such events do happen with an increasing frequency.
[Guest]: So what would happen once in two years, maybe starts happening once in six months, but you
[Guest]: definitely lose sleep when that happens.
[Guest]: It shatters you, it completely disturbs you for a few days, and you never forget that.
[Guest]: So that you will never forget when you talk about, you know, your past experiences, you
[Guest]: will never forget a person who, who behaved in a way that you completely didn't expect.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned litigation a couple of times, like, is that something that's an issue in
[Amit Varma]: India that you have to worry about litigation?
[Amit Varma]: Are you in probabilistic terms, how likely are you to get sued and, you know, also just
[Amit Varma]: in general to deal with relatives of patients when things don't go right, like we've heard
[Amit Varma]: of stories of shocking stories of doctors and nurses being beaten up when recently when
[Amit Varma]: patients have died of COVID-19.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, how big is the litigation issue and just dealing with relatives of patients?
[Guest]: It is a big issue, not in terms of, you know, the volume of cases that get registered, but
[Guest]: it's a big issue in terms of, even if one case gets registered, the way the system is
[Guest]: designed is that, you know, you're almost guilty unless you prove your innocence.
[Guest]: And that's very challenging.
[Guest]: So most of us have gone through it once a couple of years or so.
[Guest]: And when we do go through it, it's extremely biased against us is what most of us tend
[Guest]: to agree on.
[Guest]: So let me give you an example.
[Guest]: So in the city of Mumbai, for example, if somebody wants to file a case, they can simultaneously
[Guest]: file it in three different forums.
[Guest]: There's the consumer forum, there's law, and there's the medical council.
[Guest]: So you can simultaneously file the same case in all three.
[Guest]: And the doctor has to make appearances in all three simultaneously, you know.
[Guest]: And it's not that the decision in one can influence the decision in the other.
[Guest]: You can get three separate decisions.
[Guest]: So once you go through something like this, it does make you a little defensive for sure.
[Guest]: It does change the way in which you naturally treat patients.
[Guest]: And I do understand that patient rights have to be protected at all costs.
[Guest]: I do understand that doctors make mistakes and have to pay for it when they do make mistakes
[Guest]: in some form.
[Guest]: That's the only natural way to do things.
[Guest]: We all have indemnity insurance to accept the fact that we will make mistakes no matter
[Guest]: what.
[Guest]: And therefore, the compensation needs to be covered by indemnity.
[Guest]: But as long as the process is fair, I think good will come out of it.
[Guest]: As long as the process is skewed to such an extent that doctors start second-guessing
[Guest]: every move that they make, it's going to go in the U.S. way, where everything is so defensive
[Guest]: that the system will get expensive.
[Guest]: It's the example I just gave you, right?
[Guest]: So if I want to make sure that nobody gets hepatitis, I'm going to just make a thousand
[Guest]: people do LFTs to kind of say that, you know, I covered my grounds, I covered my bases,
[Guest]: I did what I had to do, despite that this happened, okay, you know, I can't help it.
[Guest]: And do it just from that perspective.
[Guest]: Do it not because it's going to help my patient.
[Guest]: Do it not because I genuinely believe it makes a difference, but do it only because on paper
[Guest]: I have done it, you know, and that's protected me.
[Guest]: So I really hope it doesn't go that way.
[Guest]: But unfortunately, you know, there are indicators that it might be going that way.
[Amit Varma]: Let's get back to COVID.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one of the very valid points that you made and which I kind of want to
[Amit Varma]: underscore is that if someone is using medicine, the burden of proof is on that person.
[Amit Varma]: That you got to show that the medicine works and the reason, you know, that deserves underscoring
[Amit Varma]: is that it's not that if a medicine doesn't work, it doesn't work.
[Amit Varma]: Medicines have tons of side effects, like, you know, in the case of steroids, as we now
[Amit Varma]: know, and as from what I recall, you were earlier than others in pointing out vociferously
[Amit Varma]: that there's no point in giving steroids in the first week of infection and all because
[Amit Varma]: people will get a fever and then they'll fight the fever and then they'll get better most
[Amit Varma]: of the time when they don't get better when they deteriorate when there are oxygen issues.
[Amit Varma]: That's where steroids like dexamethasone and all can be useful.
[Amit Varma]: The problem with giving steroids early on is that it will actually work in getting the
[Amit Varma]: fever down, but it will also get the immune system down.
[Amit Varma]: So COVID will actually hurt you more and it's in the second week where you could just completely
[Amit Varma]: collapse and it's literally because of the medicine that was given to you.
[Amit Varma]: So now what I'd like you to do for our listeners is take them through how you look at this
[Amit Varma]: whole treatment cycle of COVID.
[Amit Varma]: What is recommended?
[Amit Varma]: What is not?
[Amit Varma]: Like at a bare bones level, I know that in the first week, if you just have fever, you
[Amit Varma]: got to monitor your oxygen and you got to take paracetamol and that's it, right?
[Amit Varma]: So just kind of go through that kind of protocol for people who might be listening in and especially
[Amit Varma]: people who are not in big cities, who don't have access to doctors and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: How should they approach it?
[Amit Varma]: What should they do?
[Amit Varma]: You know, because people tend to panic, you know, you'll have an epidemic of sighing all
[Guest]: over again.
[Guest]: Also I think the reassuring thing that all the listeners need to know is that we still
[Guest]: believe that a majority of individuals get better with nothing, right?
[Guest]: If you look at the recent study, in fact, from the US, which was the antibody cocktail
[Guest]: study, they found a hospitalization rate in high risk individuals.
[Guest]: So individuals who had at least one risk factor in the placebo arm of that study, it was about
[Guest]: 3% of them who got hospitalized.
[Guest]: So it's not even the traditional 15% that we talk about.
[Guest]: It's possibly a lot lower.
[Guest]: If you include the zero prevalence studies in India as well, I'm sure the figure that
[Guest]: we arrive at would be somewhere around 3% of hospitalization.
[Guest]: So 97 out of a hundred individuals will get better at home without anything being done.
[Guest]: And I think that's very reassuring.
[Guest]: Now what happens is the typical cycle of COVID is that the first week is where the virus
[Guest]: enters the body.
[Guest]: The first week is where the virus multiplies for some time.
[Guest]: The first week is where the body launches an immune response against the virus and that
[Guest]: immune response, just by virtue of the fact that 97% people probably get better, suggests
[Guest]: that that immune response does its job in most of the cases.
[Guest]: Somehow antibodies are generated, they neutralize the virus.
[Guest]: You could feel fatigued.
[Guest]: You could feel tired.
[Guest]: You could feel low energy for some time, but by and large, your life will move on.
[Guest]: By and large, you will return to baseline in a month or so.
[Guest]: Now in that first week, what are the things that have been shown to work?
[Guest]: One of the things that may have a role is an inhaler of steroids, but steroids at a
[Guest]: very low dose inhaled directly into the lungs in some way modulates the inflammation, helps
[Guest]: in some way.
[Guest]: And there are a couple of small studies which have shown that it may work.
[Guest]: Again, the caveat is that these are small studies, maybe down the road that we may realize
[Guest]: that they aren't necessarily wonder drugs or great drugs.
[Guest]: Maybe it's a small role.
[Guest]: That being said, inhalers are extremely safe.
[Guest]: So the safety profile of inhalers has been established for a long, long time now at the
[Guest]: doses that's being recommended for COVID for a short period.
[Guest]: Again, we don't anticipate any major side effects.
[Guest]: So the inhalers work in the first week, especially if you have a cough, especially if you have
[Guest]: lower respiratory symptoms.
[Guest]: The other thing that works in the first week is the antibody cocktail.
[Guest]: So the antibody cocktail is basically preformed antibodies.
[Guest]: So normally what your body would do, generate an immune response that one to two or one
[Guest]: to 3% of individuals in whom that immune response doesn't work for some reason, they might benefit
[Guest]: with boosting their immune response with an antibody cocktail injected into them.
[Guest]: Now this works when given within the first seven days of symptoms.
[Guest]: So it has to be given early.
[Guest]: It is recommended in individuals who have risk factors.
[Guest]: So it's not recommended in individuals who otherwise also are likely to do well.
[Guest]: So if you have heart disease, if you are elderly, if you have underlying kidney disease, if
[Guest]: you are immunosuppressed in some ways, if you are obese, if you have diabetes, these
[Guest]: are the risk factors in whom you could consider the antibody cocktail.
[Guest]: Of course, it's very expensive.
[Guest]: It costs about 60,000 rupees for a dose, but it may have a role.
[Guest]: So that's what works in the first week.
[Guest]: Now by the end of the first week, majority of individuals would have recovered.
[Guest]: The fever would have settled, the cough would start getting a little better, their oxygen
[Guest]: levels would be rock solid throughout, they would never have dropped.
[Guest]: And these are individuals who don't need to do anything at this point.
[Guest]: You know, if the cough has settled, they stop the inhaler as well.
[Guest]: In this small fraction, a small proportion of individuals at the end of the second week,
[Guest]: what happens is a hyperimmune response.
[Guest]: So the body's immunity has kicked in, but it's overzealous for some reason.
[Guest]: It's overenthusiastic.
[Guest]: It does too much.
[Guest]: And that hyperimmune response causes the oxygen levels to go low.
[Guest]: That causes a person to get breathless, the cough to get worse.
[Guest]: This is the stage at which problems occur.
[Guest]: This is a stage at which individuals often get hospitalized.
[Guest]: If your oxygen levels are low, this is where the steroids work.
[Guest]: So the oxygen levels low mean that your lung is full of immune cells.
[Guest]: They could be white blood cells, they could be antibodies.
[Guest]: This whole cytokine storm that we talk about, there are lots of immune cells which are trying
[Guest]: to fix the lung, but are actually doing harm.
[Guest]: And they are suppressed with the use of corticosteroids.
[Guest]: So steroids suppress your immunity at this point where the immune response is too much.
[Guest]: If you do the same in the first week, when your body's natural immune response is trying
[Guest]: to fight it, those same steroids will suppress that natural immune response and leave you
[Guest]: completely exposed to the virus.
[Guest]: So the virus has an unopposed position where it can multiply.
[Guest]: There's no natural immunity.
[Guest]: The steroids have suppressed that.
[Guest]: Sugars also go up with steroids.
[Guest]: So it's a great environment for the virus to proliferate.
[Guest]: At the end of the first week, very often there's no virus left in the body or there's minuscule
[Guest]: virus.
[Guest]: So therefore it's safe to use steroids to suppress the immune response.
[Guest]: Now if you deteriorate further.
[Guest]: So if despite giving you steroids for about one to two days, there are certain markers
[Guest]: which also help.
[Guest]: If your CRP is above 75, you might be a candidate for a drug like tocilizumab because that's
[Guest]: a drug which supplements the use of steroids.
[Guest]: It tries to suppress your immunity even further.
[Guest]: Some studies are also looking at higher doses of steroids.
[Guest]: So the doses of steroids which are currently recommended are six milligrams of dexamethasone
[Guest]: once a day.
[Guest]: But there are some studies which suggest that if despite the dexa you're deteriorating,
[Guest]: 12 milligrams could be attempted.
[Guest]: You can double the dose of steroids, especially if you don't have access to tocilizumab or
[Guest]: you know, again, it's a very expensive drug.
[Guest]: Oxygen is life saving.
[Guest]: If your oxygen levels are low at this stage, you know, being on oxygen helps.
[Guest]: Sleeping prone really helps because it helps improve oxygenation.
[Guest]: Being on either non-invasive ventilator or high flow nasal devices also help in, you
[Guest]: know, helping your lungs recover, giving you adequate oxygen while your lungs are on the
[Guest]: pathway to recovery.
[Guest]: And if things still don't recover at this point, then you get on to ventilation, then
[Guest]: you get on to whatever salvage modalities are feasible.
[Amit Varma]: So that's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And the picture emerging here is that a lot of these people, it's not the virus that is
[Amit Varma]: killing them directly.
[Amit Varma]: The virus is setting off an immune response, which is more or less eliminating the virus
[Amit Varma]: by the end of the first week or reducing it substantially.
[Amit Varma]: And then the cytokine storm really kicks in or other, you know, the overactivity of the
[Amit Varma]: immune system is what really gets you and it's a downward spiral from there unless all
[Amit Varma]: of these treatments come in.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, when you have oxygen shortages, then it's basically the system killing you
[Amit Varma]: because otherwise those people wouldn't have died.
[Amit Varma]: All incredibly fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, we are almost at the end of the time that you had allotted me.
[Amit Varma]: And of all my guests, I would feel incredibly guilty about taking too much more of your
[Amit Varma]: time.
[Amit Varma]: So just a couple of questions, the one on COVID and then one back to medicine in general.
[Amit Varma]: And the COVID question is that you guys have just managed to get the official guidelines
[Amit Varma]: of the government actually changed to reflect what you feel the treatment protocol should
[Amit Varma]: be, which was earlier not the case.
[Amit Varma]: Earlier, the case was science would find something and then the, you know, the bureaucracy would
[Amit Varma]: catch up later, the treatment protocols would catch up later.
[Amit Varma]: But now hearteningly, one is finding that even the official guidelines are along these
[Amit Varma]: lines that don't do over treatment, don't use all these random plasma ivermectin and
[Amit Varma]: all that which don't work.
[Amit Varma]: But instead, this is a protocol to follow, which is kind of exactly what you laid out.
[Amit Varma]: So how easy or hard is it to sort of work with these kinds of authorities where bureaucracy
[Amit Varma]: is an issue, where, again, the cover my ass incentive may get in the way where they might
[Amit Varma]: be wary of, you know, not recommending something, what if something happens, you know, why not
[Amit Varma]: just put all the medicines out there?
[Amit Varma]: So what is that process like of dealing with government of dealing with authorities like
[Amit Varma]: that, because in some capacities, even you have given at least informal advice, right?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I cannot take any credit for the change in the guidelines.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, we don't know who the authors were also because, you know, I think all of
[Guest]: us want to pat their backs and all of us want to say thank you, but we don't really know
[Guest]: as of now who to thank.
[Guest]: But you know, that being said, it's a great move forward.
[Guest]: The process, I wouldn't know what was the process which actually led to the final change
[Guest]: in policy.
[Guest]: But I think all of us, you know, in whatever capacity possible have been trying to push
[Guest]: people towards rational cures.
[Guest]: I think some of it also is a consequence of bad outcomes happening.
[Guest]: So I think the mucormycosis pandemic sensitized a lot of people to the fact that steroids
[Guest]: were being possibly used for prolonged periods of times, possibly being used inappropriately.
[Guest]: And that was an eye opener.
[Guest]: So I think it took a second pandemic of the mucormycosis to realize the inappropriateness
[Guest]: of steroids.
[Guest]: Now, it's unfortunate that that's how it happened, but you know, in this case, I think that was
[Guest]: a nudge towards shifting to evidence-based medicine as well.
[Guest]: I think the rushes for remdesivir, the black marketeering that people saw for remdesivir
[Guest]: also was a nudge in the right direction in terms of people realizing that it wasn't just
[Guest]: a science problem.
[Guest]: The science problem led to actually bigger problems in terms of this belief that it was
[Guest]: life-saving, this exploitation of individuals who are at their most vulnerable.
[Guest]: And I think that was an eye opener as well.
[Guest]: Plasma, I think, you know, it was, you know, finally, after saying it over and over again
[Guest]: in different forums, I think different, you know, plasma was actually unfortunate also
[Guest]: because India, that was one great trial which came out of India, right?
[Guest]: In the midst of this pandemic, we still managed to do one good trial, which was PLACID, which
[Guest]: was related to plasma.
[Guest]: We proved that it didn't work and we still didn't take it off our guidelines.
[Guest]: So that was unfortunate in a way.
[Guest]: But I think people pointed it out over and over again, you know, after recovery published
[Guest]: their data from PLACID, I think that changed as well.
[Guest]: It's not been easy, but I think there's a network of individuals who have the ability
[Guest]: to influence the right people, the people on committees, the people on guideline committees,
[Guest]: the people in positions of creating those guidelines.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, the gradual soft influence that everyone had around possibly nudged them
[Guest]: in the right direction.
[Guest]: So I wouldn't know the exact process in which it changed.
[Guest]: But I think it's a great, great move that it changed.
[Guest]: And let's hope that that whatever thought processes opened up these doors would still
[Guest]: stay in place for future updating of the evidence.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a fantastic last point that you don't just want it to be this one-off where
[Amit Varma]: they did the right thing and, you know, whatever, but you want those processes to remain.
[Amit Varma]: So it is always science based and evidence based.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, you know, in an earlier episode, I mentioned about remdesivir being slightly
[Amit Varma]: dubious and one doctor actually wrote into me, I don't remember if he wrote to me or
[Amit Varma]: he put a Twitter comment, but he basically said that, why are you spreading wrong information?
[Amit Varma]: I have used it on my patients, it works, to which I, you know, if someone like that is
[Amit Varma]: listening to this, I would just say, go back to the start of the episode and listen to
[Amit Varma]: what we said about regression to the mean.
[Amit Varma]: And also one should not quickly, you know, ascribe causation, maybe it is something,
[Amit Varma]: some other medicine that actually helped.
[Amit Varma]: So we never know counterfactuals there.
[Amit Varma]: So my final question is this, and it's a broad question about medicine in general, which
[Amit Varma]: is, so when we look back to the 19th century, we know the state of medicine was so dismal,
[Amit Varma]: and we think of today and we say, oh, we have advanced so much.
[Amit Varma]: But it is another fallacy that humans tend to commit, they think that where they are
[Amit Varma]: now is a peak of human progress.
[Amit Varma]: And the truth is that 100 years later, when we look at the state of medicine today, we
[Amit Varma]: are going to say, oh my God, what primitive people, what are they even doing?
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: So I find that we are at an exciting time, perhaps even an inflection point for medicine.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sorry, if this is naive, please correct me.
[Amit Varma]: But I say this completely as an outsider.
[Amit Varma]: We're just looking at, for example, what our understanding of genetics and the genome,
[Amit Varma]: the insights that we've gotten from that, or what artificial intelligence is doing.
[Amit Varma]: Eric Topol has a great book, Deep Medicine about that.
[Amit Varma]: It strikes me that there's a lot to be excited about the future.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you are, of course, on the cutting edge of all of this in terms of reading up on it
[Amit Varma]: and understanding it and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So looking ahead, what is the future of medicine?
[Amit Varma]: Like, what do you think 20 years later, you will be doing differently?
[Amit Varma]: What are the ways in which your life will be better?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, some people speak about an mRNA vaccine for cancer and all that.
[Amit Varma]: That would be really nice.
[Amit Varma]: Please bring it on.
[Amit Varma]: And hopefully sleeping enough will prevent Alzheimer's for those of us who sleep enough.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from these frivolous asides, how different will the future of medicine actually
[Amit Varma]: look?
[Amit Varma]: And another context in which I kind of bring that up is that in India, most people don't
[Amit Varma]: have the privilege to go to a doctor.
[Amit Varma]: The vast majority of India is completely underserved or served by quacks.
[Amit Varma]: And the vast majority of doctors also will not know treatment protocol for basic things,
[Amit Varma]: as I discussed in my episode with Karthik Muralidharan.
[Amit Varma]: So actually, what most Indians do is that they just get by in one jugaadu way or the
[Amit Varma]: other for minor things.
[Amit Varma]: And it is only when something major happens that they actually land up at a hospital and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So that is their medicine.
[Amit Varma]: Is there hope for them?
[Amit Varma]: Is there hope for, say, AI and all of that to help empower them with information and
[Amit Varma]: knowledge and, you know, those kind of resources?
[Guest]: Some of the changes are, you know, just to allude to what we've already spoken about.
[Guest]: So something like sleep apnea, for example, right?
[Guest]: So if you see 20 years ago, so that's, you know, roughly within this, you know, I was
[Guest]: I was in MBBS 20 years ago.
[Guest]: The machine used to be about 10 kilos in terms of weight.
[Guest]: It used to be really bulky, really uncomfortable masks that people couldn't wear.
[Guest]: Almost everybody was cribbing and complaining.
[Guest]: You look at where we are today, right?
[Guest]: It's a 400 gram machine, which is now currently available.
[Guest]: You get a download, which clearly tells you, you know, what was the level of obstruction
[Guest]: before, what it is today.
[Guest]: There is feedback in terms of whether there's a leak, whether you want to change those settings,
[Guest]: how you want to manage things.
[Guest]: So just in terms of, you know, the sheer information that's currently available to us to tweak
[Guest]: things, to improve comfort, to improve patient adherence, all this has improved within a
[Guest]: span of like less than 20 years or so.
[Guest]: So tuberculosis, for example, another disease where once upon a time, you know, when the
[Guest]: MDR epidemic or the multi-drug resistant TB epidemic began, we would do cultures.
[Guest]: The cultures would take about six to eight weeks to grow.
[Guest]: Then we would do drug susceptibility tests, which would tell us what is sensitive, what
[Guest]: is not sensitive.
[Guest]: Now we have cartridge based tests, which within one and a half hour tell us whether you have
[Guest]: MDR TB or not.
[Guest]: So there's been a lot of progress, which we've already experienced in the past 15 to 20 years.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, the point that you make is very valid.
[Guest]: So progress at the cutting edge does not necessarily percolate down to progress for the vast majority.
[Guest]: However, I mean, something like telemedicine, for example, has the potential of reaching
[Guest]: people in remoter areas.
[Guest]: I think COVID has normalized telemedicine to a certain extent.
[Guest]: So I work with IIT and we've created this digital stethoscope, for example, which when
[Guest]: given to a primary health care center, the person can apply it to a person's chest and
[Guest]: I can listen to the sounds via Bluetooth via an app somewhere else in the country.
[Guest]: So I can literally auscultate a patient I'm not seeing.
[Guest]: These are potential things that can make a difference, but you know, it's not only technology,
[Guest]: it's also the human skill that needs to develop.
[Guest]: If we realize, you know, you can give people thousands of ventilators, but you know, even
[Guest]: at an institute like mine, it takes a certain level of skill to use a ventilator.
[Guest]: And I cannot claim to have complete expertise.
[Guest]: I probably have 50% expertise, you know, because I'm not an intensivist, it's the intensivist
[Guest]: at my hospital who really knows how to handle a ventilator.
[Guest]: So to assume that somebody who's not even at a tertiary care institute in a smaller
[Guest]: center would just be given a ventilator and the person would be able to handle the ventilator
[Guest]: is not necessarily true.
[Guest]: So I think the improvements in terms of technology has to go in parallel with the improvements
[Guest]: in terms of human expertise as well to use those measures.
[Guest]: You know, when you talk about molecular genetics, when you talk about phenotyping individuals,
[Guest]: so for sleep apnea, there's a potential of a new drug which can cure sleep apnea in a
[Guest]: certain subset of individuals.
[Guest]: So you know, even a CPAP might look bulky, even the current CPAP might look bulky and
[Guest]: redundant 20 years from now, if we have a pill that's going to fix it, right?
[Guest]: But that level of what we call individualized medicine, personalized medicine, that level
[Guest]: of phenotyping to try and figure out who fits into which basket is going to be expensive.
[Guest]: It's going to be difficult to interpret, difficult to manage.
[Guest]: So we struggle with letting evidence-based medicine for a disease that has basically
[Guest]: five drugs or six drugs, if we struggle with that percolating, then imagine trying to communicate
[Guest]: the sophistication that you get from a whole genome output and trying to explain the nuances
[Guest]: to anybody.
[Guest]: I'm not looking down on somebody or I'm not talking about some, you know, me being superior
[Guest]: to somebody else, but you know, we are going to be as illiterate about things like that
[Guest]: as anybody else.
[Guest]: And to constantly be able to update yourself and to then be able to make that reach the
[Guest]: lowest rung of society, I think that's going to be a big challenge.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, these are very wise words in the sense that, you know, I am as optimistic
[Amit Varma]: as you that science will keep marching on forward, but the state and the society also
[Amit Varma]: have to keep up and advance similarly.
[Amit Varma]: And what I would also point out is that many of these treatments that will come up from
[Amit Varma]: understanding the genome better or using the insights of AI are something that privileged
[Amit Varma]: people like us can access really easily.
[Amit Varma]: But that is not the core problem.
[Amit Varma]: The core problem is something else and the core problem is just getting it out there.
[Amit Varma]: And especially in India, with the state of both our state and our society, it's worrying,
[Amit Varma]: but hopefully science will empower us and we'll get the job done.
[Amit Varma]: Lance, I'm so privileged and lucky to have three hours of your time of all people to
[Amit Varma]: talk to.
[Amit Varma]: So thanks so much for sharing your insights and more power to you for all the amazing
[Guest]: work you do.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me over.
[Guest]: I know this is a great podcast and all of my friends and family are very, very excited
[Guest]: for me being a part of this.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you for giving me a platform.
[Amit Varma]: It's my pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out the show notes, dive into rabbit
[Amit Varma]: holes, a lot of fascinating stuff in there.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Lance on Twitter at Lancelot underscore Pinto.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and The Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening and take care of yourself.